This is New Guinea, the most fascinating
and mysterious island in the world.
Because it's located very near to the
equator, most two-dimensional world maps
based on the Mercator projection warp
New Guinea's size and make it appear a
lot smaller than it really is. In
reality, New Guinea is the second
largest island in the world, only behind
Greenland, and only just. If you placed
Greenland directly over New Guinea,
you'd see that they're actually almost
the same size, despite our perceptions
thinking otherwise.
Placed over Europe, New Guinea is
roughly triple the size of Great Britain
and would extend from England and
northern France nearly across the
continent through media to the Black
Sea. [music] Or, placed over America, it
would stretch from the edge of Long
Island in New York State all the way
down to Texas and nearly hit the
Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex.
New Guinea is a way more enormous place
than most outsiders think it is, and
it's also a way more unknown place than
you probably think it is as well. As
much as 80% of New Guinea's territory is
covered by dense [music] rainforest,
making it the third largest rainforest
on the planet behind only the Amazon and
Congo rainforest that are on actual
continents, which is why some people
have taken to calling the New Guinea
rainforest the second Amazon. And if
that wasn't enough, New Guinea is also
extremely mountainous. The chain of
mountains running through the center of
the island, known as the New Guinea
Highlands, are roughly the same size,
elevation, and scale as the Rocky
Mountains are in North America, and they
feature the highest elevated peaks
anywhere between the Himalayas in Asia
and the Andes in South America. They are
by far the highest and most imposing
mountains found on any island in the
world. And because of this harsh
geography of dense rainforest combined
with towering mountains, there is still
a ton of territory hidden there that has
remained unexplored and uncharted to
this very day, deep into the 21st
century. And like we're seeing beneath
the Amazon right now, there are some
incredible new discoveries taking place
here right now, and there's a lot of
things down there beneath the rainforest
canopy that you probably won't expect.
Like, for example, glaciers, which
probably aren't the first thing that you
associate with tropical rainforests in
New Guinea. And yet, on the western side
of the island that's under the control
of Indonesia, exist the increasingly
small remnants of ancient glaciers that
have been continually shrinking since
the start of the Industrial Revolution.
The nearby mountain of them, called
Puncak Jaya, contains the highest
elevated point on the island at 4,884
m or 6,024 ft above sea level, which is
also the highest point on any island in
the world. It's high enough that
temperatures plummet the further up it
you go, which transforms New Guinea's
abundant rainfall into snow, which is
compacted down the mountain face into
the glacier below it for at least the
past several thousand years. The New
Guinea glaciers are one of only a
handful of so-called tropical glaciers
that can be found in the world, and
they're so remote and not well known
that even some Indonesians are aware
that their country actually contains
them. The New Guinea glaciers were first
spotted by Westerners in 1623 by a Dutch
explorer called Jan Carstensz. But his
account of snow and glaciers up on a
mountain so near to the equator brought
him nothing but ridicule from his
contemporaries, and hardly anybody
believed him for centuries. The
existence of the glaciers in New Guinea
that he claimed to see weren't verified
by Western science for nearly 300 years
after Carstensz's first observation,
when Dutch expeditions between 1909 and
1913 in the early 20th century finally
confirmed them. [music] And
unfortunately, they probably won't exist
for very much longer. We now know that
back in 1850, the area of the New Guinea
glaciers stood at about 19.3 square
kilometers, and they were photographed
extensively by airplane in 1936.
But by 1972, the glaciers' area had
already shrunk by nearly 2/3 from its
1850 size. And airplane photographs
captured the noticeable decline from the
1936 levels. By 2018, the glaciers had
shrunk by more than 97% from their 1850
levels, and just half a square kilometer
of their area still remained intact.
Their rapid decline in our modern times
has been captured in satellite images
like this one taken in 1988, this one
taken in 2017, and this [music] one
taken in 2020, showing hardly any trace
of them still remaining. The most recent
scientific study conducted into the
glaciers' size was published in March of
2025 and was based on 2024 data. And it
showed that just 0.165
square kilometers of the glaciers still
survived, a 67% decline just from a few
years previously in 2018. If the current
decline rate of the glaciers here
continue, they're expected to be
irreplaceably gone forever by the end of
this decade, sometime around 2030. And
New Guinea and Indonesia will no longer
have any glaciers for the first time in
tens of thousands of years. And it won't
be the first major geographical
alteration that has happened in New
Guinea.
In fact, back during the last ice age,
when sea levels were significantly
lower, New Guinea used to be directly
connected to Australia by land in a
larger continent that we've since called
Sahul. Geologically speaking, New Guinea
is located on the Australian tectonic
plate instead of the Eurasian plate,
making it more connected to Australia
from a geologic perspective than any of
the islands to its west. And why New
Guinea is classified as being a part of
Oceania rather than Asia. New Guinea and
Australia were intermittently connected
by land to each other for millions of
years, and they only became separated
due to rising sea levels around 8 to
10,000 years ago, basically seconds ago
in geologic time, which is why there is
a significant amount of overlap in the
animal species between both places
today, like their prevalence of
marsupials, and why there's some
speculation that animals that are
currently extinct in Australia might
continue existing somewhere in the deep,
remote, and unexplored parts of the New
Guinea interior. New Guinea is second
only to the Amazon for the rate of new
species that are still being discovered
and described by modern science.
Literally thousands of new species have
been formally described by researchers
in New Guinea just since 2010, though
the vast majority of those new species
have been small organisms like plants,
insects, and spiders. Larger discoveries
of previously unknown or lost mammals
are a lot rarer, but from time to time,
they do still happen. As recently as
2025, a biologist from the Czech Academy
of Sciences captured the first-ever
photographs of the subalpine woolly rat
living in its natural environment in the
mountainous New Guinea Highlands.
A massive, fluffy rodent measuring more
than 2 and 1/2 ft long and weighing more
than 4 lb that had previously only been
known to scientists because of a handful
of museum [music] specimens, clearly
illustrating how relatively large
species in New Guinea can continue
remaining elusive in the dense
mountainous jungle. Another notable
recent example of a major discovery of a
large animal like this in New Guinea is
the Wondiwoi tree kangaroo, a large,
20-lb tree-dwelling kangaroo-like
marsupial that was discovered on the
island in the 1930s, but was then never
seen again for decades and eventually
classified as extinct, only to suddenly
become spotted again by a researcher in
2018 [music]
who captured the first-ever photograph
of one alive and well in the wild. And
even more recently came the rediscovery
of Attenborough's long-beaked echidna on
New Guinea. This unique-looking echidna
was first collected and described in New
Guinea in 1961,
and was entirely known by just a single
specimen of a dead one that happened to
be found back then, and it was kept
under lock and key for decades in the
Naturalis Biodiversity Center in the
Netherlands. Decades later, after it was
found in 1998, researchers realized that
it was a wholly unique species of
echidna, [music] and it was generally
regarded to be extinct since no other
example of one had ever been
encountered. That is, until just a few
years ago
[music]
in 2023, when a team of researchers
successfully recorded the first-ever in
the Cyclops Mountains region of northern
New Guinea, pulling it out of the list
of extinct species in the process. And
to give you just a taste of how brutal
the environment can be in New Guinea for
these researchers, one of the expedition
members fell through a moss pit into a
previously unknown cave complex during
the search and broke his arm in two
places,
but discovered half a dozen new species
of blind harvest mice, spiders, and
scorpions down there in the process.
While another researcher reportedly had
a leech stuck to his eyeball for three
whole days. No, thank you. But based on
these two examples of large and
previously believed extinct animals
showing up again in New Guinea decades
later in 2018 and 2023, there is a
chance that others might be waiting to
be rediscovered somewhere out there,
too. And none is a more tantalizing
possibility than the thylacine, or
commonly known as the Tasmanian tiger.
The thylacine was a large carnivorous
marsupial predator that served a similar
ecological niche as canids like dogs and
wolves did elsewhere on other
continents, though they were completely
biologically unrelated to them. They
were among the largest carnivorous
marsupials to ever exist, and they were
most well known for their impressive
ability to open their jaws to an unusual
extent, up to about 80°. The thylacine
once had a range that spanned all across
the ancient Sahul continent when New
Guinea and Australia were all connected.
They're believed to have gone extinct in
New Guinea and Australia around 3,200
years ago, at about the same time as the
introduction of the dingo. But as the
dingo never made it all the way down
south to the island of Tasmania, the
thylacine continued surviving there in
robust numbers until the modern era of
European colonization. The European
settlers in Tasmania treated the
thylacine as an unwanted pest that
attacked their livestock, and so the
government introduced a bounty hunting
program on the species that rapidly
eliminated their numbers and drove them
into extinction. The last known living
thylacine died in 1936 at the Hobart Zoo
in Tasmania, and ever since then, no
confirmed sighting of another one has
ever been made, and the species was
formally declared to be extinct decades
ago in 1982. But nonetheless, because
New Guinea is so massive, because it's
such a hard place to properly explore
due to the rainforests and mountains,
because it's so rural and
underdeveloped, because we know the
thylacine's range once extended across
the island, and because we have very
recent examples like the Wondiwoi tree
kangaroo and Attenborough's long-beaked
echidna turning back up alive there
decades after they were declared to be
extinct, there is a remote chance that
if the thylacine was ever going to be
rediscovered again, it would probably be
somewhere hidden in New Guinea. And that
is far from the only unknown thing on
the island that could be hidden from us.
New Guinea is, politically speaking,
divided roughly in half today between
Western New Guinea under the control of
Indonesia and Papua New Guinea in the
east, a separate and independent
country. And Papua New Guinea is,
bizarrely, the only country in the world
today a completely unknown population.
As in, nobody really knows how many
people are actually living there. As of
the country's most recent national
census that was conducted in 2024, the
official population stands at 10.18
million, but that census has been highly
criticized as being inaccurate due to
numerous issues that accompanied it,
like incomplete coverage, missing forms,
a warehouse containing material that
caught on fire in the middle of it, and
serious logistical problems with
accessing some of the most remote
population centers in the country. Only
about 13% of Papua New Guinea's
population are estimated to live in
cities today, by far the lowest
urbanization rate of any country today
in the 21st century. Most of the
country's population lives across the
interior of the country in rugged,
difficult-to-access areas that can often
only be reached by airplane or
helicopter, making conducting an
accurate census probably harder than in
any other country on the planet. The
2024 census and the last census before
that in 2011 have both been widely
criticized as being unreliable and
inaccurate, and the last census that
conducted that actually was considered
to be reliable was all the way back in
2000, more than a quarter of a century
ago now. And while the official 2024
census estimates the country's
population at 10.18 million, a separate
study conducted by the UN and funded by
Australia in 2022 that based itself on
satellite data and analysis concluded
that the population was probably closer
to around 17 million people in reality,
a huge difference in the official census
that possibly undercounted the
population by nearly 6 million people.
There's no conclusive agreement on any
of these numbers, but it's absolutely
mind-blowing that a country in the 21st
century can still be potentially unaware
of the existence of millions of people
within its own territory, like to the
point where Papua New Guinea might not
even be aware of the existence of about
40% of its actual population.
Interestingly, there also appears to be
a major difference in population between
the eastern and western halves of the
island. Papua New Guinea's population
could be either about 10 or 17 million
people today depending on which study
you want to use, while West New Guinea's
officially cited population is only
around 5 and 1/2 million, potentially
less than a third of the population in
the east despite their areas being
similar. And this can mostly be
explained by the differences in the
geography between the two halves.
>> [music]
>> In more temperate parts of the world,
population densities are usually higher
in flat, lowland environments, but the
opposite is most often the case in
tropical parts of the world where the
lowlands are covered by dangerous,
hostile rainforests, and where the
mountains have more mild temperatures
and less dangerous diseases and wildlife
that allow for denser human habitation
and agriculture.
>> [music]
>> In the case of New Guinea, the
mountainous highlands run across the
entire island almost evenly from west to
east, but their structure is very
different on either side of the modern
border. On the western Indonesian side,
the mountains are very steep and almost
immediately plunge down into the
rainforest below, while the coasts are
enveloped by dense mangrove swamps, an
overall extremely difficult place to
sustain large numbers of people in. In
comparison, the mountains on the eastern
side feature lower parallel ranges that
contain a large, agriculturally rich
plateau between them that continues to
be the most densely populated
non-coastal part of the island. And
unlike on the western side, the
mountains on the eastern side actually
reach all the way down to the coast and
create natural coves that break through
the otherwise omnipresent mangrove
swamps everywhere else along the coasts,
which in modern times enabled the
establishment of port cities like Port
Moresby and Lae that continue to be the
largest urban settlements on the island
today. And part of why Papua New Guinea
has very limited governmental authority
anywhere beyond these cities is getting
anywhere else is just so damn difficult.
Another factor that affects Papua New
Guinea's ability to know how many people
actually live within their borders is
the sheer, almost unbelievable levels of
linguistic and ethnic diversity that's
present on the island. Across both sides
of the island of New Guinea, more than
1,000 separate and individual languages
are believed to still be spoken today,
which is roughly one in seven languages
across the entire world. In Papua New
Guinea alone, there are more than 840
languages spoken, and hardly any of them
are even remotely related to any of the
others, making Papua New Guinea by far
the most linguistically diverse country
in the world today with nearly double
the languages spoken in India despite
its vastly smaller geographic size. The
isolation in New Guinea created by all
of the mountains and rainforests is so
great that until fairly recently, some
groups weren't even aware of the
existence of neighboring groups who only
lived a few kilometers away. Because of
its harsh and fractured geography, the
island has never in its history
experienced the establishment of a
strong, centralized authority which in
other parts of the world led to the
dominance of a single language, and
that's how you ended up with hundreds
and hundreds of different isolated
groups who developed their own
independent languages in New Guinea over
thousands of years. There are
technically two lingua franca languages
spoken in Papua New Guinea today, an
English-based creole language called Tok
Pisin, and to a lesser extent, an
indigenous language called Hiri Motu.
But less than half of Papua New Guinea's
population knows either of these lingua
franca languages, making communication
very difficult between certain groups
even today. Now, on a slight tangent,
Tok Pisin itself has a lot of extremely
interesting grammar and vocabulary that
it takes from English that I think is
very interesting to share. Some of my
favorite examples include "Mi loveim yu"
for "I love you", "time belong cold" for
"winter" coming from "time belong cold",
"ask place" for "place of origin" coming
from "ask place", [music]
and "grass belong mouth" meaning
"mustache" coming from "grass belong
mouth". For a long time, it was
circulated in western media that the Tok
Pisin word for "helicopter" was
"mixmaster belong Jesus Christ" coming
from "mixmaster belong Jesus Christ"
with the explanation supposedly being
that the blades of a helicopter looked
like the blades of a mixmaster blender,
and Jesus Christ went to heaven, so
therefore, the blender that rises up to
heaven, or mixmaster belong Jesus
Christ. But apparently, this specific
term might have been a fabrication made
up by visitors to Papua New Guinea back
in the 1960s.
And none of this is to even mention the
numbers of tribes in New Guinea that
continue to remain uncontacted today
with potentially still unknown languages
of their own.
It's believed that probably no longer
any truly uncontacted tribes that exist
in the more densely populated eastern
side of the island in Papua New Guinea,
but it is still believed that there are
probably several uncontacted tribes who
exist in the western side that's under
the control of Indonesia. At the start
of the 21st century, it was estimated by
Survival International that there were
still around 40 uncontacted tribes that
existed across the remote rainforests of
western New Guinea, the second highest
concentration of uncontacted peoples
anywhere in the modern world, only
behind the Amazon region of South
America. However, after more than 25
years of the Indonesian government's
activities in Western New Guinea and
visits by missionaries, adventure
tourists, and social media influencers,
the numbers of uncontacted tribes still
remaining today has been estimated by
Survival to have declined down to only
between two and 10, most of whom are
aware of the outside world's existence,
but have decided to keep their distance
and remain separated. They are among the
final ancient holdouts on the island
resisting contact with the outside
world, a process that has been ongoing
for tens of thousands of years now.
Archaeological evidence suggests that
the first humans arrived in New Guinea
as much as 60,000 years ago during one
of the very first human migrations out
of Africa, making the indigenous Papuans
among the most ancient people on the
planet. Indigenous Papuans are loosely
related to Aboriginal Australians,
Melanesians, and other dark-skinned
people found across the Asia-Pacific
region, but interestingly, despite their
similar-looking physical appearances,
indigenous Papuans are not closely
related to Africans at all. In fact,
Europeans are genetically closer to
Africans than Papuans are, and a large
part of that is due to the incredibly
high concentration of Denisovan DNA
that's present in Papuans.
Denisovans were an ancient subspecies of
humans that used to live across Asia
tens of thousands of years ago, and the
Papuans, for whatever reason, have the
highest concentration of Denisovan
ancestry out of any population in the
world today. Their distant ancestors
likely interbred with the Denisovans on
their way to New Guinea, and after sea
levels rose and isolated New Guinea from
the rest of the world around 10 or 8,000
[music] years ago, their genetics became
even more isolated from the rest of the
world, and so the Denisovan ancestry
managed to stick around. Today, most
Papuans share between 4 to 7% of their
genome with the Denisovans, but there
are some communities up in the New
Guinea Highlands who have upwards of 12%
of their genome shared with them
instead. By far the highest
concentration known of any population in
the world today.
And despite the isolation of the Papuans
in New Guinea after around 10,000 years
ago when it became an island, they were
capable of amazing and still puzzling
things, too. At Kuk Swamp, an
archaeological site in Papua New Guinea,
evidence has shown that the Papuans
independently developed agriculture on
their own without any outside influence
sometime around 8,000 years ago, making
them one of the very few societies on
the planet to have independently
developed agriculture and domesticated
plants.
The Papuans were likely the first people
to domesticate bananas, taro, and
sugarcane, which later spread elsewhere
in the world after a wave of
Austronesian settlers began arriving in
New Guinea around 3,000 years ago and
initiated trade. The arrival of the
Austronesians also introduced a new
layer of linguistic diversity to New
Guinea, as well.
Today, out of the around 1,000 languages
that are spoken in New Guinea, between
200 and 300 of them are believed to be
Austronesian, while the others are
Papuan. Now, one of the most interesting
agricultural mysteries of New Guinea is
how exactly the sweet potato managed to
arrive there. The sweet potato is
originally from South America, but
evidence appears to suggest that it
arrived in New Guinea sometime near the
13th century, hundreds of years before
Columbus ever arrived in the Americas
and started the Columbian Exchange. The
leading theory is that the Polynesians
probably managed to establish contact
with indigenous South Americans sometime
between the 11th and 13th centuries,
which led to the sweet potato spreading
westward through trade until it
eventually arrived in New Guinea and
completely revolutionized everybody's
life there. Because the sweet potato
could be grown in the highland
environments of New Guinea, and because
it could be used for pig fodder without
the need for cooking it, Papuan
societies in the highlands that adopted
it were able to rapidly amass pigs and
dramatically expand their own
populations into large and complex
societies in the process, which remained
uncontacted from the outside world
longer than any other major society on
the planet did. The Highlands of New
Guinea are basically an island within an
island, highly elevated mountains and
plateaus where agriculture is possible
and human life is comfortable,
surrounded by dense, hostile
rainforests, and then the ocean. With
knowledge of the island's actual
interior any deeper than the immediate
coastlines being at a minimum to Western
science for centuries, it was long
assumed by Westerners that the interior
of New Guinea would have no large
populations of people, and the Highlands
themselves remained completely unknown
and uncharted to the Western world until
very recently in the 1930s.
To give some context as to how insane
this is, Europeans managed to reach the
South Pole in Antarctica decades before
they ever managed to reach the Highlands
within the interior of New Guinea.
Beginning in the 1930s, Westerners
finally began using airplanes to take
expeditions into the New Guinea
interior, where they expected to find
only sparse populations of people.
Instead, to their utter surprise, they
discovered a very densely populated
society in the Highlands that was
probably home to around a million
people, marking the last major first
contact between two large societies in
human history.
The Europeans were flabbergasted to have
discovered a large Stone Age
civilization that was still thriving so
late into the 20th century, [music]
but many of the photographs taken by
these first Western visitors to the
Highlands also captured the even greater
feelings of shock on the faces of the
indigenous Papuans, who had literally
only known their own ancient society in
the Highlands just as it had been for
thousands of years,
>> [music]
>> and then suddenly got introduced to
white people, airplanes, firearms, and
even metal tools for the first time in
their lives. It is a testament to how
hugely isolated New Guinea really was,
and to an extent still is. And among the
other greatest mysteries surrounding the
island and its isolation is how the son
of one of the wealthiest people in the
world managed to just completely vanish
there. In the early 1960s, Michael
Rockefeller was the young 23-year-old
son of Nelson Rockefeller, who was then
serving as the governor of New York, and
he was the great-grandson of Standard
Oil co-founder and richest man to have
ever lived, John D. Rockefeller. Michael
Rockefeller was deeply interested in
anthropology, and his father had just
opened the Museum of Primitive Art in
Manhattan and had appointed him to the
museum's board. [music] Wanting to find
a statement piece for the museum's
collection, Michael wanted to curate a
collection of art directly from the
source itself, [music] and so he decided
to conduct an expedition to visit the
Asmat people in what was then still
Dutch New Guinea. The Asmat had only
just started becoming pacified by the
Dutch government and missionaries in the
mid-1950s,
and even by the 1960s, many of them had
never seen a white person before their
lives. While headhunting, cannibalism,
and cross-village warfare were still
fairly common practices, Michael spent
months interacting with the Asmat in
1961, and in November of that year, he,
along with three companions, were
sailing a small catamaran down the Asmat
coast attempting to conduct trade. Then,
one night, as they crossed the mouth of
the Bet Sea River, harsh waters managed
to flip and capsize their boat, leaving
them all stuck. Two indigenous teenagers
on board who had been brought along as
guides almost immediately jumped into
the water and swam for the shore, and
eventually made it up to the village of
Agats hours later where they were able
to call for help. Michael and his other
companion on board the catamaran, Dutch
anthropologist René Wassing, were left
clinging to the overturned boat for
hours as they slowly drifted away from
the shoreline. According to Wassing,
after waiting around for a while and
growing increasingly concerned that they
would drift out into the open ocean,
Michael decided to strip down to his
underwear and tied two empty jerrycans
around his waist for buoyancy. Told him
he thought he could make it to the
shore, and then jumped into the ocean to
attempt to swim around 8:00 a.m. in the
morning, which at the time was probably
around 12 nautical miles away from that.
It was the last time that anybody would
ever see any trace of him, and
tragically, an airplane spotted Wassing
still stranded on the boat just hours
later after Michael had left, and he was
quickly rescued just the following
morning. A massive search and rescue
effort that involved hundreds of people,
airplanes, helicopters, and ships was
launched for Michael across the area
where he disappeared. Seeing as how he
was the son of the governor of New York
and a member of one of America's
wealthiest and most prominent families.
But [music] after 2 weeks of searching,
no trace of him was ever found, and the
search was officially called off. The
Dutch colonial government that was still
in control of Western New Guinea at this
time officially concluded that Michael
had drowned during his swim to the
shore, but there is a significant amount
of evidence and speculation that he
actually met a far, far more gruesome
fate instead. Headhunting, cannibalism,
and tribal warfare were all still common
practices amongst the Asmat at this
time, and two Dutch missionaries who
were fluent in the local indigenous
languages and who had been living in the
Asmat area for years steadily
accumulated a trove of testimony from
witnesses that directly contradicted the
official Dutch government report.
According to their own reports, a small
group of Asmat warriors were walking
along the beach that very morning when
they just happened to encounter Michael
Rockefeller after he swam ashore. It's
important to note that a few years
previously, a Dutch colonial raid in a
village nearby had resulted in the
killings of five important Asmat
warriors, a transgression that the Asmat
historically resolved through eye for an
eye killings and blood debts. So, upon
their happenstance encounter with
Michael that morning, a white man who
looked like the white men who had killed
their tribe members a few years
previously, the group of warriors
allegedly had an argument as to whether
or not to kill him in vengeance until
one of them just stabbed him in the ribs
and began killing him. Then, they
allegedly took his body back to their
camp where they cooked and ate his flesh
and brains in a ritualistic cannibal
ceremony that was common for these kinds
of vengeance killings at the time.
Locals allegedly confessed these details
to both of the Dutch missionaries a few
weeks afterward and revealed that they
had distributed his head, bones, ribs,
and glasses amongst more than a dozen
other people. Both missionaries had sent
their reports to the Dutch colonial
government, while another Dutch colonial
investigation into the disappearance the
next year in 1962 came to the same
conclusion as the missionaries had, that
he was probably killed and eaten instead
of drowning. Nonetheless, this
information was deemed by the Dutch
colonial government at the time to be
highly politically sensitive as they
were attempting to still hang on to
their colonial possession in New Guinea
at the time and were incentivized to
present their administration there as
being stable and peaceful. And the
potential killing and cannibalization of
the son of New York's governor in their
territory was anything but a good look
for them. So, the government officially
concluded that he had drowned instead.
While multiple independent
investigations since then have seemed to
indicate that he was brutally killed and
eaten instead. Then, decades after his
disappearance, the story took another
bizarre turn in 2015. Documentary
filmmakers who were working on a film
about Michael's disappearance were
sifting through a small collection of
uncut film reels in a warehouse in New
England that had been filmed in the
Asmat region of New Guinea back in 1969
by a photographer who was investigating
Michael's disappearance at the time,
just 8 years after he had vanished.
These uncut film reels apparently sat
for more than 40 years collecting dust
in that warehouse. But upon studying the
reel in 2015, the documentary filmmakers
discovered something astonishing that
had apparently been overlooked by the
people who had originally filmed it. A
very brief clip of a group of Asmat
tribesmen paddling a war canoe with a
very conspicuous looking white man
paddling alongside them. The man bears
at least some passing resemblance to
Michael Rockefeller. And since it was
captured just 8 years after his
disappearance in the same area, it's led
to a lot of renewed speculation that
rather than drowning or getting killed
and eaten, he may have also joined the
tribe and integrated with them and was
never heard from again that way. And
even if this man in this photo isn't
Michael Rockefeller in 1969, then who
the hell is he? Nobody has yet been able
to figure it out. And regardless of what
actually happened to him, the vanishing
of Michael Rockefeller and his ultimate
fate remains one of the most enigmatic
mysteries of New Guinea and conclusive
proof one way or the other is somewhere
out there still hidden from us. I also
think it's important to clarify that
cannibalism and head hunting have
continued disappearing from New Guinea
society since that time and since the
1970s and 80s have been practically
non-existent and eradicated. Now, in the
modern day, possibly the biggest thing
that's hidden from view in New Guinea is
one of the world's most dramatic ongoing
conflicts that was just starting to
begin as Michael Rockefeller vanished.
You see, the Dutch still controlled
Western New Guinea at that time, but
they were about to transfer the
territory over to Indonesia, which has
been outrageously controversial ever
since. Back in 1949, a few years after
the end of the Second World War, the
Netherlands finally agreed to recognize
Indonesia's sovereignty over all of the
territories that had used to belong to
the colonial Dutch East Indies, but with
the exception of Western New Guinea,
which the Dutch decided to continue
hanging on to for just a bit longer. The
Dutch government argued that the
indigenous Papuans were too ethnically
distinct [music] from the rest of
Indonesia to be included in the same
country. So, they would continue
administering it themselves until it was
determined that the Papuans could
sufficiently take over and govern
themselves. The Indonesians, however,
never accepted [music] this. They argued
that they were the legal successor state
of the whole Dutch East Indies, which
included Western New Guinea. And so,
they continued demanding a complete end
of Dutch colonial rule throughout the
entire archipelago. Both sides were also
inherently interested in Western New
Guinea's abundant mineral resources,
especially what at the time was the
recently discovered and then untapped
Grasberg Mine nearby to the summit of
Puncak Jaya, which was already
understood back then to contain an
enormous amount of copper, gold, and
silver.
budged on their positions regarding the
issue. And in the early 1960s, Indonesia
began turning to the Soviets for support
and began buying up Soviet weaponry. So
then, alarmed at the potential spread of
Soviet influence in Indonesia, the US
began applying pressure on the Dutch
government to give up and surrender
Western New Guinea to them, which is the
political context that Michael
Rockefeller vanished into in 1961
and why it was especially awkward for
the Dutch who were desperate at the time
to keep the Americans on their side in
this greater overall dispute. In the
end, it didn't matter though. The US
wanted Indonesia on their side in the
Cold War in Southeast Asia no matter
what and the only way they could do that
was by continuing to pressure the
Netherlands into surrendering West New
Guinea to them. So, in 1962, the Dutch
agreed to transfer West New Guinea to a
temporary UN administration under the
promise that a plebiscite would be held
in the territory to determine its
ultimate fate. The Indonesian military
moved into West New Guinea and then
organized this vote in 1969, but they
only allowed 1,025
specific hand-picked people to vote in
the decision, less than 1% of the
territory's eligible voters at the time,
and they were all made to vote
effectively at gunpoint in the presence
of the army. So, naturally, the vote was
in favor of union with Indonesia and its
legitimacy has been hotly disputed by
West Papuan independence activists ever
since. Indonesia to formally annex West
New Guinea and an armed pro-independence
insurgency formed to resist their rule
called the Free Papua Movement or the
OPM. Indonesia's response to the OPM
insurgency in West New Guinea since the
early 1970s has historically been brutal
and relentless, transforming the
territory to what many independent
analysts have described as effectively
an authoritarian police state. Peaceful
political expression and independence
advocacy among indigenous Papuans is
still legal and harshly repressed by the
Indonesian state. Even raising the
Morning Star flag in the territory, the
symbol of the Free Papua Movement, is
legally regarded by the Indonesian state
as an act of treason and can
theoretically be punished by up to
decades in prison. For decades,
Indonesia has also strictly controlled
access to West New Guinea, blocking
reporters, journalists, NGOs, and even
UN officials and others from any visits
to the territory, which has obscured
Indonesia's practices and repression
going on there and have also complicated
scientific expeditions to the western
side of New Guinea that are frequently
denied access, leaving much of Western
New Guinea as a sort of information
black hole on the world map. Since the
conflict began in the early 1970s,
[music]
credible reports of mass killings and
forced displacements of indigenous
Papuans by the Indonesian authorities
have been frequent and extensive.
Scholarly research by the University of
the South Pacific in 2007 concluded that
as many as 300,000
indigenous Papuans have been killed by
the Indonesian authorities since the
occupation of West New Guinea began.
While a report by the Yale Law School
back in 2004 argued that Indonesia's
actions there amounted to the definition
of genocide. In addition to the harsh
repression and violence, the Indonesian
state has attempted to reinforce their
demographic control in the territory by
encouraging a massive settlement program
that they've called transmigration,
which is aimed at resettling landless
Indonesians from crowded urban
environments in Java, [music] Sumatra,
and Sulawesi to West New Guinea and
giving them land that's been taken from
the indigenous Papuans. As many as
300,000
Indonesian settlers were relocated to
West New Guinea under this program
following Indonesia's takeover of the
territory. And today, it's believed that
about half of the inhabitants in West
New Guinea are either settlers
themselves or the descendants [music] of
settlers.
The OPM, largely armed with nothing but
bows and arrows, javelins, and old
leftover outdated weaponry from the
Dutch colonial era, have waged a
low-level campaign of guerrilla
resistance against the Indonesians in
West New Guinea for decades [music] now,
attacking critical infrastructure like
roads and highways and most importantly
of all, the Grasberg Mine, which as it
turned out was among the largest copper
and gold mines ever discovered anywhere
in the world. That helped make the
Indonesians rich as they began exporting
New Guinea's minerals all around the
world. And while a lot of outside
countries effectively turned a blind eye
to Indonesia's treatment of the
indigenous population.
In 2018, after the OPM launched attacks
on an important road that the
Indonesians were paving across the
territory, the Indonesian army launched
its largest military operation in
decades against them, including massive
air raids, the deployments of thousands
of additional soldiers, and even the
alleged usage of chemical weapons.
All with unclear but certainly high
fatalities.
As recently as 2022, the UN has
condemned Indonesia's practices in West
New Guinea and some have even called for
the deployment of a peacekeeping force
to the territory to enforce order. But
regardless, due to Indonesia's refusal
to allow hardly anybody into the
territory ever and because of the
outside world's reliance on all of the
gold, copper, and timber that the
Indonesians are taking and exporting
from West New Guinea, there's very
little prospect of anybody ever actually
showing up to help the indigenous
Papuans west of the border. And so, many
of them have viewed continuing militant
and guerrilla activity as their only
effective means of resistance. The
conflict briefly captured the world's
attention in February of 2023 when the
OPM attacked a small airplane that had
landed near their territory that was
piloted by a New Zealand man, Ben Philip
Mark
They took Merridans as a hostage,
threatened the Indonesian government
that they would kill him unless they
granted West New Guineans independence.
This all led to an intense standoff
between the OPM and Indonesia. And
because the hostage was a New Zealander,
it briefly brought outside attention to
the reality of the horrors that were and
still are taking place in West New
Guinea. Eventually, after more than 19
months of holding him, the OPM agreed to
release Merridans alive. And Western
attention towards the conflict in West
New Guinea has gradually waned. Though
Indonesia's continued restrictions and
repression in the territory continue
unabated. And accurate information about
what's actually going on on the ground
down there is still difficult, if not
impossible, to actually come by.
Before we go any further, I'm often
asked how I conduct my research for my
videos like the ones we're covering
today. And most importantly, how I keep
up with the volume of news and
information. And the answer is Ground
News. I've been using their app and
website since 2022, which have made
videos like these possible, which is why
I'm happy that they're sponsoring
today's compilation. Ground News was
built to give you a global perspective
and clarity on the news you're
consuming. Their data-driven approach
aggregates news from over 50,000 sources
from all around the world and organizes
them by story. So, you can instantly
compare how events are being covered not
just across the political spectrum, but
across borders. Want to see how Iranian
state media is covering the current
conflict with the United States or how
independent outlets differ from massive
conglomerates? Ground News makes that
easy. Every story comes with breakdowns
of political bias, factual reliability,
and ownership structure, so you're not
just reading headlines, you're
understanding why they were written that
way. I always use Ground News for my own
research in nearly every video I
produce. And it's incredibly helpful
when trying to parse and understand
breaking news. As a recent example, more
than 500 sources covered the recent
attack at the White House Correspondents
Dinner in Washington, D.C. But different
sources reported on the incident in
different ways depending on their
political slant. Left-leaning outlets
often framed the incident with
qualifiers like trying and shooting,
emphasizing the White House's claims
blaming Democrats and the suspect's
teacher background to highlight partisan
rhetoric over threat's severity. While
right-leaning coverage more often
dramatized the incident with terms like
defiant, would-be assassin, stormed, and
President Trump, underscoring courtroom
hostility and life in prison stakes to
evoke defiance against conservative
figures. I can even filter by location
to narrow down on how other countries
reported on this story. But I think that
the most fascinating feature of Ground
News is Blindspot, where you can see
major stories that people on the other
side of the political aisle are seeing,
but you're not. For example, right now,
the right is currently talking about how
mandatory hijab restrictions on women
still remain in place in Iran despite
some women publicly taking them off in
protest. While the left is currently
talking about how the Canadian Prime
Minister's trade advisory group has been
formed for the first time ahead of
upcoming Canada-U.S. trade negotiations.
Two stories you might have otherwise
missed if you only rely on a few sources
for your news. I genuinely believe that
Ground News is a seriously useful tool
in today's increasingly polarized media
environment. I use it all the time
myself for research whenever my videos
touch on politically charged subjects,
which happen to be basically all of
them. It's an extremely useful tool for
gaining an understanding a nuanced view
of the news. And I've partnered with
them to get you the exact same advantage
subscription that I have for 40% off by
subscribing through my link at
ground.news/reallifelore,
or you scan the QR code that's here on
your screen, clicking the button that's
here on your screen, or by following the
link that's down below in the
description. You'll also be greatly
helping to support my own channel at the
same time. So, thank you if you sign up.
And now let's get back to the rest of
the compilation.
In my worldview, the Amazon rainforest
is the most fascinating and the most
mysterious place of the Earth's surface
today in the 21st century. It [music]
sprawls seemingly endlessly across a
vast area of South America, roughly 6
million square kilometers all in. An
area of land that's about equivalent to
3/4 the size of the continental 48
United States. [music]
The majority of the rainforest, about
60% of it, is all contained within the
borders of Brazil. But significant parts
of it also extend out across the borders
of parts of Peru, Colombia, Ecuador,
Bolivia, Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname,
and French Guyana as well. This huge
area of the continent that the Amazon
covers is extremely sparsely populated
today and rural, with only around 30
million total residents spread out all
across it, [music] which is even fewer
people today than live in Poland. If the
Amazon rainforest was its own
independent country, it would be among
the bottom 10 countries in the entire
world in terms of average population
density, with only about five human
beings per square kilometer on average.
But by far, the largest single
concentration of people within the
Amazon rainforest region today is this
random-looking blob of high population
density almost in the dead center of it,
which is the Brazilian city of Manaus.
Home to well over 2 million people
today, Manaus is the seventh largest
city in Brazil. But its weird location
in the middle of the Amazon also makes
it the most heavily isolated city in the
entire Western Hemisphere to have a
population of more than a million
people, as there isn't a single other
city of comparable size to it anywhere
within a thousand kilometers in every
direction. And so, as you'd expect,
actually physically getting yourself
there doesn't work like most other
cities do. There still aren't any paved
roads that connect Manaus to the rest of
the Brazilian core thousands of
kilometers away to the east. It's
theoretically possible to drive from
cities like São Paulo or Rio de Janeiro
to Manaus, but for hundreds of
kilometers along Brazilian Highway 319,
the route is currently unpaved. And
whenever it rains there, which, believe
it or not, is a frequent occurrence in
the rainforest, the unpaved road turns
into a muddy quagmire with endless
nothing all around it. No cell service
and no chance of getting a tow truck to
bail yourself out. So, that road is a
pretty sketchy option to actually take.
And even when you get to the other end
of the highway close by to Manaus,
you'll still have to take a ferry over
to the city since the entire length of
the Amazon River still doesn't have a
single bridge that crosses over it. The
primary actually paved road that
connects Manaus to the rest of the
outside world runs to the north of it up
towards Venezuela, Brazilian Highway
174. This route makes it, at least in
theory, sort of possible to safely drive
along paved roads to the rest of the
Brazilian core. But the catch is that
you'd have to travel all the way around
through Venezuela, Colombia, and Peru
just to re-enter back into Brazil again.
Meaning that for most practical
purposes, the only ways that most people
from the rest of Brazil usually get to
Manaus isn't by land, but by airplane or
by taking a boat down the Amazon River
itself, which is fully navigable to
ocean-going vessels for about 2/3 of its
course deep into the continental
interior. Another similar blob of high
population density in the middle of the
modern Amazon is the Peruvian city of
Iquitos, which is home to around 500,000
people today and is in theory even more
isolated than Manaus is. Not because of
distance from other large settlements,
but because of logistics. Other than for
a single 100-km dead-end stretch of road
that ends in the nearby town of Nauta,
there aren't any other roads at all that
connect Iquitos with anywhere in the
outside world, which makes it the
largest city in the world that can't be
reached by road that isn't on an island.
Iquitos exists precisely where it does
because it sits at about the exact spot
on the Amazon River that's still fully
navigable all the way out to the
Atlantic Ocean, which has always
provided a free-to-use and easy-to-use
superhighway for Peruvian and Brazilian
merchants to take transporting the
Amazon's resources out to the global
market. Rather than using cars, trucks,
or trains, the Amazon River itself
provides nearly all of the
transportation to the few big modern
cities in the Amazon like Manaus and
Iquitos. So much so that when you travel
along it, you'll even see floating gas
stations and convenience stores for
boats instead of cars. And so, as you'd
expect, proper road infrastructure
throughout the Amazon region is
extremely hard to come by, and even the
major clusters of people within it don't
really have any major roads extending
out from them since the Amazon River is
their primary method of transportation
and connection to the outside world
instead. This means that there are huge
swaths of the Amazon rainforest that are
completely absent of any roads at all,
which makes driving through most of it
an impossible feat. While trekking
through the rainforest on foot is an
extremely arduous process as well,
simply because of the unbelievable
density of trees here. Once you get out
beyond the major settlements and
highways, it's been estimated that there
are probably somewhere around 390
billion individual trees densely packed
all throughout the Amazon rainforest,
which is nearly four times as many stars
as exist in the entire Milky Way galaxy.
A single square kilometer of the forest
can contain up to 150,000
individual trees and well over 90,000
tons of plant biomass. A fact that can
be clearly seen when you look at images
like these ones of the city of Manaus
that butts right up against the boundary
with the Amazon. On one side, you have a
dense city that's like an island of
civilization, and on the other, you
literally have a thousand kilometers of
superdense wild rainforest that's mostly
just empty of people. So, observing what
the Amazon's actual surface looks like
from the ground from anywhere beyond the
Amazon River or from the handful of
roads and settlements dotted throughout
it has always been very difficult. While
for most of modern history, observing
what the Amazon surface looked like from
the air with aircraft or even with
satellites have also been practically
impossible because of just how insanely
dense and thick the rainforest canopy is
everywhere throughout it. As a result,
the vast surface area of the Amazon
rainforest that lies beneath the canopy
we can see from the sky easily contains
the largest amount of unexplored,
unmapped, and uncharted land area
remaining anywhere on the Earth's
surface in the 21st century. With some
scientists arguing that we currently
understand even less about it than we do
this surface of Mars. That's why in my
view it's the most mysterious and the
most interesting place remaining on the
map in the 21st century. And all of a
sudden, very recently, modern advances
in the fields of cartography and
archaeology, like LiDAR scanning, are
finally, after all this time, enabling
us to penetrate through the previously
impenetrable rainforest canopy to see
the Amazon surface like we've never seen
it before. And the last blank space on
the Earth's surface filled up by the
world's biggest rainforest is finally
beginning to get mapped out and filled
in. And some of the things that we've
already discovered down there just over
the past decade alone have been so
profoundly shocking they've begun to
upend our entire views on history and
science in the process. And even more
incredible discoveries down there are
probably coming very soon.
In order to understand why some of these
recent discoveries beneath the Amazon
canopy have been so shocking, you need
to understand what the general
historical view on the Amazon region has
been within mainstream academia for
centuries. How they came to those
conclusions and why they've all of a
sudden, very recently, this decade in
the 2020s begun to be proven incorrect.
You see, for the past several centuries,
the generally accepted mainstream view
on the Amazon was that it had always
been basically a pristine, largely
untouched wilderness environment. Mostly
undisturbed and unaltered by human
beings. This view was reinforced by the
fact that for the past several
centuries, pretty much ever since
Europeans first arrived in the Americas,
the Amazon has always appeared to be
very sparsely populated by indigenous
people in groups no larger than on a
hunter-gatherer tribal scale. Largely
because the soil quality throughout the
Amazon rainforest is extremely poor and
sterile and not very helpful for
large-scale agriculture that would be
necessary for larger, more complex
civilizations.
But this is a pretty weird thing to
consider at first because it almost
seems counterintuitive when you say that
the soil quality in the Amazon is
terrible for crop farming while it
simultaneously supports more than 390
billion trees in the densest and the
most biodiverse forest in the world. But
the reason for this is very interesting.
You see, one of the primary sources of
nutrients for all of the plants in the
Amazon rainforest actually comes from a
highly unexpected source, far away on a
completely different continent. Here at
the southernmost edge of the Bodélé
Depression in Central Chad lies the
Bodélé Depression, an ancient dried-up
lake bed that used to be a part of the
primordial Lake Mega-Chad until it was
consumed by the expansion of the Sahara
several thousand years ago. Now, the
dried-up lake bed in the Bodélé
Depression here contains massive amounts
of exposed rock minerals composed of
dead microorganisms that are chalked
full of phosphorus, an essential
nutrient that fertilizes plants for
growth. The powerful trade winds that
whip across the Sahara from east to west
will then pick up enormous amounts of
Saharan dust, including phosphorus-rich
dust from around the Bodélé Depression,
and will then continue carrying all of
that dust for thousands of kilometers
through the air across the Atlantic and
towards South America, where about 28
million tons of Saharan dust will fall
across the Amazon rainforest throughout
an average year, including about 22,000
tons of phosphorus that was picked up
from the Bodélé Depression in Chad that
provides the Amazon with vitally needed
nutrients.
But because rainfall throughout the
Amazon rainforest is extremely high,
these nutrients that arrive from the
Sahara are always rapidly washed out
from the soil and eventually drain down
into the Amazon River itself, which
means that the trees and other plants in
the Amazon have evolved to essentially
pull up the nutrients from the soil
about as soon as they're deposited
there. Moreover, the very high
year-round temperatures in the
rainforest and the high humidity levels
means that dead organic material like
leaves and fallen plants or trees
decompose extremely rapidly, which means
that their stored nutrients are released
and lost very rapidly and re-consumed by
other plants and fungi before they can
ever be deposited into the soil. This
all means that the soils of the Amazon
never really gain any build-up of
nutrients at all since all of the trees
and the other plants within the
rainforest are literally living on the
recycled nutrients of all the other
trees around them. And so, the soils
themselves are effectively sterile and
useless for agriculture, which is why
historically most of the scientific
community considered large-scale
agriculture in the Amazon region to be
impossible, which is why they believed
that the existence of large-scale,
complex indigenous societies within the
Amazon were also impossible as well.
The prominent American archaeologist
Betty Meggers, who specialized in South
American anthropology through the
Smithsonian Institution throughout the
20th century, was a very well-known
advocate of this idea. She wrote a whole
book that was published in 1971 titled
Amazonia: Man and Culture in a
Counterfeit Paradise, in which she
argued that without agriculture in the
Amazon being possible, the maximum
population density that the Amazon
rainforest could naturally support
through hunting and gathering was only
0.2 people per square kilometer. And so,
the Amazon had to be an extremely
sparsely populated place throughout its
entire history as a result. This view
was reinforced over centuries by the
fact that European settlers and
explorers and their descendants only
ever seemed to encounter small tribes of
indigenous people in the rainforest,
[music] hundreds of which continue to
exist across the remote depths of the
Amazon still today. In fact, it's
estimated that still today, even in the
21st century, the Amazon rainforest is
so vast, so remote, and so difficult to
access from the outside that there are
still around a hundred or so indigenous
tribes dotted throughout it that remain
so-called uncontacted, maintaining their
traditional hunter-gatherer lifestyles
like their ancestors have for thousands
of years with little if any contact with
the outside world. The Amazon is the
host of the largest number of remaining
uncontacted people in the world today.
And while estimates of their exact
numbers are highly varied, it's
generally believed that there are around
10,000 of them scattered throughout the
rainforest hiding from the outside
world. Only observed by us every so
often from striking aerial photographs
like these ones I'm showing to you right
now. But they aren't really uncontacted
in the way you think they [music] are.
They're pretty much all universally
aware of the existence of the outside
world and have a very long history of
contact with us. But they all
voluntarily choose to hide and remain
isolated in the rainforest because they
deeply fear what the outside world will
do to them if they're found. Over the
past several centuries since the arrival
of Europeans and even over just the past
few decades in recent living memory,
countless numbers of these isolated
Amazonian tribes have been massacred and
enslaved by the outsiders.
Across the late 19th and early 20th
century, when the importance of rubber
as a strategic material exploded, the
rubber tree that's naturally indigenous
to the Amazon basin correspondingly
exploded in value and importance as
well, which resulted in an unprecedented
surge of European colonists flocking
into the Amazon basin to strike out
their fortunes and was the catalyst for
the growth of the few big Amazonian
cities along the navigable stretch of
the Amazon River like Manaus and Iquitos
I mentioned previously. However, as the
demand for labor on the growing
Amazonian rubber plantations expanded,
the European owners of the plantations
engaged in massive
that some historians have compared in
scale and brutality to the Holocaust or
the Armenian genocide. In the aftermath
of the rubber boom in the mid-to-late
20th century, the indigenous survivors
of this genocide in the Amazon fled into
the most remote and difficult to access
depths of the rainforest with their
memories of the horrors the outside
world inflicted upon them passed down
through the generations. So, rather than
keeping themselves hidden from the
outside world because they just prefer
to keep their more traditional, simple
lifestyles, they really keep themselves
hidden out of this very deeply ingrained
[music] fear of what the outside world
will do to them again if contact with us
is ever re-established. A fear that
hasn't helped out very much by the
action of loggers, miners, missionaries,
drug traffickers, and even
anthropologists in recent history,
either.
Throughout the 1960s and '70s, the
Brazilian government basically treated
the Amazon basin as an empty place full
of resources that was holding the
country's development back. And the
indigenous people within were largely
sidelined or even killed. One indigenous
tribe in the Rondônia region of the
Brazilian Amazon was almost completely
massacred by Brazilian gunmen hired by
ranchers and settlers there in the
1970s, down to only a single survivor, a
man who kept on living a militantly
reclusive and distant life in the
rainforest for decades up until he
passed away from natural causes just a
few years ago in 2022. For decades,
nobody alive knew anything about the
man, not his name, his language, or the
name of his extinct tribe. But they well
understood his fears and his intense
desire to be left alone from the outside
world as he frequently shot arrows at
anyone who ever attempted to initiate
contact with them for years. He
eventually gained the nickname of the
man of the hole due to the deep ditches
he would frequently dig around his
campsites for protection. The Brazilian
Ministry of Native People discovered him
in the late 1990s and eventually fenced
off the entire area where the man lived
and created a nature reserve out of the
area in 2007, which became this isolated
island of forest with a lone uncontacted
indigenous man inside of it, surrounded
by a sea of deforested cattle ranches,
until the man inside died of natural
causes in 2022, leaving his unknown
tribes modern genocide ultimately
completed. Throughout the 1970s and
'80s, the Brazilian government tried to
establish peaceful contact with
indigenous tribes in the Amazon by
setting up trading posts in the
rainforest with metal tools and other
useful objects. But the posts would
occasionally lead to violent
interactions with the tribes and would
frequently spread outside diseases to
the tribes that they lacked any
immunities to, in a process that has
gone on ever since Europeans first
discovered the New World a half
millennia ago, which would sometimes
wipe out half of a tribe's population
within only a matter of weeks. These
disasters eventually led the Brazilian
Department of Unknown Tribes to take a
radically different approach starting in
1987, when they decided that isolated
tribes in the Amazon shouldn't ever be
contacted by the outside world at all
unless they, the tribes, voluntarily
chose to initiate contact first,
creating a sort of real-world Prime
Directive from Star Trek in the process.
This was also a part of the late 20th
century Brazilian government's creation
of the indigenous territories across the
country that are heavily concentrated
within the Brazilian Amazon, which are
currently more than 700 areas set aside
for exclusive use by the country's
indigenous population, including the
Vale do Javari in the far west of the
Brazilian Amazon here, which is believed
to contain the highest concentration of
uncontacted people in the entire Amazon
and by extension in the entire world.
The territory is roughly the same size
as Portugal and it's completely illegal
for any unqualified outsider to enter
into it, and it contains an estimated 14
separate uncontacted tribes within it
numbering around 2,000 people all in
all, who are occasionally observed by
the Brazilian government from the air,
which is where most of these striking
aerial photographs of uncontacted people
in the Amazon have come from. The Vale
do Javari itself is part of a much wider
area today that's known as the
uncontacted frontier, an arc of the
remote western Amazon region that
straddles the border between Brazil,
Peru, and Bolivia, that's arguably the
single most remote location anywhere on
the Earth's surface that remains in the
21st century. Nowhere else in the world
today are there more uncontacted people
than here, including a highly elusive
tribe known as the Mashco Piro on the
Peruvian side of the uncontacted
frontier, around 50 of whom were
recently seen and photographed by an
organization known as Survival
International in July of 2024 during a
very rare encounter with the outside
world. Because of these very recent
photos and this encounter, the Mashco
Piro are now believed to be the single
largest uncontacted tribe remaining in
the Amazon and in the world, probably
numbering around 750 total individuals.
Their location was also notably captured
here only a few kilometers away from an
active logging company, which Survival
International says threatens the tribe's
continued existence. Critics of the
Brazilian system of indigenous
territories argue that they permanently
reserve about 13% of the country's total
land area to a small population of
indigenous people that only make up 0.4%
of Brazil's total population and that
that much land full of valuable
resources getting locked out from
development is holding the country's
economic development and potential
prosperity back in the process. Illegal
logging, ranching, and mining within
several of the indigenous territories is
already a relatively common practice,
but the arguments in favor of preserving
the system aren't just for the rights of
the indigenous people who live there,
but also to protect the unknown scale of
the biodiversity in the Amazon and the
unknown species of plants and animals
that are almost certainly still existing
there, currently unknown to science.
We have understood for a very long time
now that the Amazon is by far the most
biodiverse ecosystem on the planet. It's
estimated that a whopping one in every
10 known species in the world lives just
within the Amazon rainforest, including
at least two and a half million species
of insects, tens of thousands of plant
species, and around 2,000 bird and
mammal species, along with a whopping
one in every five fish species which
live in the Amazon rivers and streams.
There's a scientific study from 2001
that concluded just a quarter of a
square kilometer in the Amazon
rainforest in Ecuador was capable of
supporting more than 1,100 separate
individual species of tree. The
biodiversity of species within the
rainforest is so high compared to any
other location in the world that brand
new Amazon species are still being
cataloged by the scientific community
just about every single day on average.
According to the Brazilian National
Institute of Amazonian Research
headquartered in Manaus, an estimated
60% of the tree species within the
Amazon have yet to be properly cataloged
and identified, and there's no telling
how many insect, bird, reptile, and
mammal species remain undiscovered deep
within it as well. Some of the most
recent animal discoveries made in the
Amazon have been particularly
interesting, such as this red-striped
monkey that was only discovered in 2015,
this species of dart frog that was only
found in 1999, this bald parrot that was
only discovered in 1999 as well, or this
unique species of blind and bright red
catfish that was only discovered in the
waters of the Amazon in 2007. There's
even a huge new species of northern
green anaconda that was only very
recently discovered in the Amazon by
researchers this year in 2024 that could
potentially be the biggest snake species
in the world, though that's currently
unconfirmed.
Some Amazon researchers believe that the
current pace of deforestation going on
in the rainforest is destroying the
remaining unknown species hidden there
faster than they are being discovered,
and there's probably entire species
currently going extinct there before the
scientific community even becomes aware
of them. And there's always the very
slight possibility that deep within the
rainforest's most uncharted and
unexplored depths, there could be exotic
large animal species that remain
undiscovered as well. One of the biggest
examples in recent history of a large,
previously unknown animal species
getting discovered by the scientific
community was the case of the saola, a
large forest-dwelling bovine creature
that was only unexpectedly discovered
deep within the jungles of rural Vietnam
in 1992 and only first photographed in
1993. And the deepest depths of the
Amazon are even more remote and
difficult to access than where the saola
was discovered in Vietnam, so who knows?
There's a very popular legend among
several indigenous tribes in the Amazon
of a mythical monster that's
colloquially known as the mapinguari.
And while descriptions of the legend
vary widely from tribe to tribe, there
are some who believe that many of the
descriptions of it closely match that of
the giant ground sloth known as the
Megatherium, which used to exist across
the South American continent before it
probably went extinct sometime around
11,000 years ago. The Megatherium was a
giant ground sloth that was about the
same size modern-day African elephant,
and a very recent discovery in 2023
nearby to the Amazon of a set of
Megatherium bones modified into jewelry
appears to suggest that at some point in
history, indigenous people in the
Americas used to live side by side with
the giant ground sloth, the knowledge of
which could have potentially been passed
down orally from generation to
generation and eventually became the
basis for the modern mapinguari myth.
But that hasn't stopped some people from
speculating that the continued
reportings mapinguari by indigenous
tribes in the Amazon suggest that the
Megatherium could still survived after
all this time somewhere deep inside of
the rainforest. But that's probably not
the most likely possibility because a
creature of that enormous of size would
leave behind major signs of its
existence like carcasses, hair,
droppings, remains and predator
droppings, and much more that have to
date never actually been found. And even
though the Amazon is a big and remote
place, hiding a creature of that size
for this long would still probably be
almost impossible. But that doesn't mean
it isn't still fun to think about and
speculate. If a large, living, extant
land animal currently unknown to science
was going to exist anywhere on the
Earth's surface today, it probably would
be somewhere deep within the Amazon
hidden beneath the canopy. And while one
of the most fascinating recent
scientific discoveries made within the
Amazon wasn't of a large, legendary,
living animal, it was still just about
as exciting as one anyway.
In 2011, a geoscientist named Andres
Ruzo, who grew up in Peru, Nicaragua,
and the United States, had heard legends
dating back to his childhood of a
boiling hot river that supposedly
existed somewhere deep within the
Amazon. So that year, he set out on an
expedition deep within the rainforest of
central Peru to try and see if he could
find it. And sure enough, hundreds of
kilometers away from the nearest active
volcano, he stumbled upon the legendary
boiling river, now known to the outside
world as the Shanay Timpishka, a fully
flowing 6 and 1/2 kilometer long river
whose waters average a scalding
temperature of nearly 86° C
or 186° F.
Not exactly boiling, technically
speaking, but still hot enough to almost
instantly kill any animal or person
unfortunate enough to fall inside. The
local indigenous people had, of course,
known about the boiling river in the
Amazon for generations, but until Ruzo's
encounter with the river in 2011, it
remained completely unknown rest of us
in the outside world outside of legend.
And it's now understood to be the
longest and hottest boiling river known
in the world. [music] A natural wonder
as wide as a two-lane street and nearly
5 m or 16 ft [music] deep in places.
Made even more puzzling that it isn't
volcanic activity that causes the river
to get so hot, [music] but a geothermal
feature beneath the area instead.
And almost a century before Russo's
expedition in the Peruvian Amazon
revealed the boiling river to Western
science [music] based only on hearing
about a legend, another Western explorer
sent out on a series of expeditions
across the Amazon based on hearing
similar rumors and legends about
long-lost civilizations and ruins hidden
deep within the Amazon despite the
contrary academic consensus. A British
man named Percy Harrison Fawcett. In the
early 20th century, Fawcett became
obsessed with finding a lost
civilization in the Amazon rainforest
that he believed existed and which he
steadily began to call the lost city of
Z.
>> [music]
>> Part of his convictions on this lost
civilization's existence stemmed from
the historical record of early European
explorers in the Amazon like Francisco
de Orellana, a Spanish conquistador who
became the first European to sail
through the entire length of the Amazon
River between 1541 and 1542 during his
search for the legendary city of El
Dorado. During his early voyage through
the Amazon, Orellana reported coming
across several large indigenous cities
that featured dense populations,
organized armies, fortified towns,
well-developed and maintained roads, and
even monumental construction projects.
Reporting that for centuries was widely
believed to be nothing more than the
wild exaggerations of a glory-hungry
conquistador. Countless expeditions
across the following centuries were made
in the Amazon to try and find any traces
of these lost cities, but none were ever
successful. But the legends of them
inspired Fawcett to begin his own
expeditions for them in the early 20th
century. For nearly 20 years between
1906 and 1924, Fawcett took seven
expeditions throughout the Amazon region
in search of his lost city of Z with a
heavy focus on the southeastern Amazon
in Brazil and the western Amazon region
in Bolivia and Peru.
But over all that time, he never ended
up discovering anything very
substantial. No giant stone ruins, no
lost cities, and only small bands of
indigenous tribes and little villages.
In 1925, Fawcett organized his eighth
and ultimately final expedition to find
the lost city of Z along with his son, a
friend, two horses, eight mules, and a
pair [music] of dogs. They set out for
the city of Cuiabá on the edge of the
Amazon in western Brazil, and after they
crossed the upper Xingu River into the
rainforest itself, none of them were
ever seen or heard from again and simply
vanished into the vastness of the Amazon
forever. Their ultimate fates still
unknown to us an entire century later.
Fawcett's ill-fated expeditions that
failed to find any lost civilizations in
the Amazon appear to only further
support the mainstream consensus [music]
that such Amazonian civilizations never
actually existed and that the rainforest
had always been a largely pristine,
sparsely inhabited wilderness. But then,
several decades later beginning in the
1970s, a series of steady archaeological
discoveries in the Amazon would slowly
begin to shift this century-long held
viewpoint. [music]
In 1977, a researcher named Ondemar Dias
discovered a series of large-scale
man-made geoglyphs within the Acre
region of the Brazilian Amazon in
recently deforested land there. Well,
even further discoveries were made by
flying aircraft over the region. To
date, since that time, literally
hundreds of these kinds of complex
geoglyphs have been discovered by
researchers across the Acre region that
have been dated to have been constructed
between 1 AD and 1250, which suddenly
reignited the interest in the
possibility of there maybe being
advanced pre-Columbian civilizations in
the rainforest that had remained
undiscovered. In the Upano Valley region
of the Amazon in eastern Ecuador, traces
of settlements were discovered by
researchers in the 1970s. And then, more
clues there began to get uncovered by
archaeologists led by Stephen Rostain
with France's National Center for
Scientific Research who began
excavations in the area in the 1990s
where they began discovering large
dugout ditches and even roads that had
been long overgrown by the rainforest's
foliage. Around the same time in the
1990s, another team of archaeologists
led by Michael Heckenberger from the
University of Florida began exploring an
area in the upper Xingu region of Brazil
very nearby to the area where Fawcett
mysteriously disappeared from in the
1920s during his search for the lost
city of Z. And they also discovered
ancient roads, bridges, and ditches that
appeared to form the remnants of
long-lost walls, moats, and causeways
that over decades of hands-on,
on-the-ground studying steadily added up
to a collection of at least 19 large,
pre-planned, pre-Columbian villages in
the region that featured well-planned
circular plazas.
But researchers still didn't generally
consider this to be a truly urbanized
area of the pre-Columbian past. None of
the discovered settlements here in the
upper Xingu had clearly defined urban
centers with monumental architecture you
would expect in civilizations like
U-shaped temples or pyramids. And so,
they appeared to be more of a collection
of Amazonian villages that worked
together rather than any true
large-scale civilization. Their
discovery nonetheless encouraged further
searches in other areas of the Amazon
though, such as in the Llanos de Mojos
region of the Amazon in northern Bolivia
where on-the-ground research and limited
remote sensing studies steadily revealed
a similar pattern as in the upper Xingu
region. Dozens to even hundreds of
isolated small villages across an area
of roughly the size of Rhode Island. But
even though hundreds of kilometers worth
of overgrown canals and causeways were
discovered here and there was abundant
evidence of pre-Columbian agriculture
and forest management, the logistical
problems involved with actually mapping
the entire region out in a deeply remote
part of the rainforest shrouded from
above by the densest forest canopy in
the world proved to make connecting all
of the numerous dots in the region an
almost impossible task. And so for a
while, it was pretty unclear if all of
these small settlements were even
related to each other or not. The signs
were there of a potential lost
civilization in the Bolivian Amazon for
decades, [music] but without any clear
urban centers discovered in the puzzle,
the researchers mostly just had a series
of lost villages instead.
But all of that would finally and very
suddenly change only very recently in
2022 when a team of archaeologists
operating in the region led by Heiko
Prümers of the German Archaeological
Institute released an earth-shattering
paper in the journal Nature. His team
pursued a different approach that
utilized a new key technology that is
quickly revolutionizing the field of
archaeology and our understanding of
what exists beneath the Amazon
rainforest, LiDAR, an acronym for laser
imaging detection and ranging. Flying in
a helicopter about 200 m or 650 ft up
above the floor of the rainforest, the
team used an onboard LiDAR system to
shoot down a grid of infrared beams down
to the surface that ignore the dense
foliage in the canopy, hit whatever is
actually down below on the surface, and
then bounce back up to the system on the
helicopter with a measure of distance in
between. As the helicopter flies over
the area being surveyed, the LiDAR
system steadily creates a colossal
number of data points that eventually
creates a high-resolution map of the
surveyed area without any of the trees
being present, which reveals what the
area actually looks like. Using this
more modern technique, the team led by
Prümers carried out LiDAR mapping
surveys of six different areas in the
Llanos de Mojos region that revealed a
total of 26 unique archaeological sites
in the region, 11 of which were
previously totally unknown to science.
And two of those sites that were
revealed were especially interesting
because for the first time in modern
history, the LiDAR maps revealed them to
actually be very significant
pre-Columbian cities complete with the
monumental architecture that had always
been missing from countless searches in
the Amazon over the past nearly five
centuries of history. The sites included
mud-brick conical pyramids that stood
more than 21 m or 70 ft tall on the
scale of several Mayan pyramids known to
exist in Central America. And they were
shown to anchor a web of sprawling
smaller settlements all connected by
causeways and roads that stretched out
for several kilometers. And there were
even canals and a complex water
management system that connected the
main urban centers with nearby rivers.
>> [music]
>> The team believes that the settlements
were abandoned around 600 years ago
sometime around the year 1400, [music]
nearly a century before the arrival of
the Europeans for unknown reasons. But
their existence finally proved that
dense, complex societies within the
Amazon rainforest capable of building
monumental architecture did indeed exist
at some point in the pre-Columbian past
and that the Amazon was significantly
more densely populated in the past than
previously believed. The Llanos de Mojos
region in the Amazon alone, a region
roughly the size of England, is now
believed to have supported as many as 1
million people before the arrival of
Columbus. And it was all right in the
middle of many of the areas that were
explored by Fawcett's lost city of Z
expeditions more than 100 years ago.
Fawcett didn't discover any ruins of
long-lost cities in the area because it
turned out he was ultimately searching
for the wrong kinds of things. The
unknown society that built these
pyramids and cities in the Amazon of
northern Bolivia didn't use stone like
the Maya, Inca, or Aztecs did that stood
the test of time better and made them
easier to find. Instead, they used other
natural materials that were more readily
available to them in this environment
like mud bricks and wood. So, while back
in their heyday, their cities probably
looked every bit as impressive as the
Mayan cities do to us today. The
materials they used decomposed more
quickly over the centuries of
abandonment and weren't as durable. So,
they ended up just blending in far
better with the overgrowth of the Amazon
that reclaimed them over centuries
without human intervention. The
discovery of these long-lost monumental
cities hidden under the rainforest
canopy for centuries in northern Bolivia
was the most significant archaeological
discovery made in the region for the
century. And Heiko Prümers even
prophetically predicted that over the
next 10 or 20 years, even more
previously unknown cities in the Amazon
would probably get discovered. That
would include some even bigger and more
complex than the Llanos de Moxos site.
And it would only take fewer than 2
years for him to be proven right.
Because just this year, back in January
of 2024, another earth-shattering paper
was published by Stephen Rostain and his
team that concerned their own years
worth of discoveries and research back
in the Upano Valley site that I touched
on a bit previously in the Amazon of
eastern Ecuador. As I mentioned
previously, Rostain and the French
National Center for Scientific Research
had been engaged in research in
Ecuador's eastern Upano Valley site for
decades since the 1990s. And just like
in the upper Zingo and Llanos de Moxos
sites, his team had found evidence of
small central plazas, raised mounds,
pottery, and jugs. Scattered evidence of
a potential civilization, but without a
complete map of the entire region
obscured by the rainforest canopy, it
was impossible for them to put all of
these pieces together. Everything
changed, however, in 2015 when the
Ecuadorian government agreed to fund a
LiDAR survey of the Upano Valley to
finally reveal what was all hidden there
beneath the foliage. Over the next
several years, Rostain's team used
aircraft and onboard LiDAR combined with
extensive ground excavations to
painstakingly survey and map out a 300
square kilometer area within the Upano
Valley region of the Ecuadorian Amazon.
And they published all of their years
worth of findings in the journal Nature
in early 2024. And their LiDAR survey
mapped out what can only be described as
the ruins of a truly lost major ancient
civilization that used to exist in the
Amazon.
Their survey in this 300 square
kilometer area, about the same size as
the island of Malta, uncovered more than
6,000
individual rectangular platforms that
measured about 20 m by 10 m and about 2
to 3 m high. All arranged in groups of
between three and six units clustered
around a plaza with a central platform.
These were thousands of long-abandoned
homes with areas of especially dense
settlement concentrations forming
heavily urbanized areas. And one of the
structures their LiDAR uncovered within
the plaza of one of the densest
complexes was a massive 140 m by 40 m
and 5 m tall platform, probably the site
of long-lost monumental buildings that
were used for ceremonies. The
settlements were all surrounded by webs
of agricultural fields complete with
extensive drainage canals and all
interconnected by a huge network of
long-lost and unused roads that included
multiple impressive features. One of the
roads observed by the survey was more
than 25 km long, and several of the
roads included direct right angles, a
difficult engineering feat for any
society to have accomplished here in the
geographically rough terrain. Defensive
ditches were observed blocking some of
the settlements from outside attack, and
like in Llanos de Moxos in Bolivia, a
vast network of causeways and canals
were discovered that brought abundant
water to the area as well.
This discovery in the Ecuadorian Amazon
revealed a society that was even denser
and more complex than the previously
discovered one in Llanos de Moxos in
Bolivia, which itself was also an
earth-shattering discovery in its own
right. Some of the researchers involved
have even postulated that back in their
prime, the previously unknown about
cities, streets, and monuments that the
indigenous people constructed here in
the Upano Valley rivaled or even
surpassed those of the much more
well-known Maya civilization in Central
America. While the team who wrote the
paper on the Upano Valley discovery
stressed that estimating the site's
previous population is extremely
difficult, the paper's co-author,
archaeologist Anton Dorison, suggested
that as many as 30,000 people could have
lived there at its peak, which would
have put it on about the same scale as
Roman era London. Other experts believe
that the Upano Valley site could have
supported even more people, potentially
as high as even 100,000 or so, which, if
that's true, would have made it among
the largest human settlements anywhere
in the world at the time when it was
populated. The other fascinating thing
about this discovery is that it's
believed to be ancient, like really
ancient. The team dated the area to be
inhabited sometime between around 500 BC
at the earliest to sometime between 300
to 600 AD at the latest, meaning that
whatever civilization existed here did
so for around 1,000 years, along the
same rough timeline as the Roman Empire
in western Europe did. By the time the
European conquistadors arrived in the
Amazon, these ancient civilizations'
ruins had already been abandoned for
around 1,000 years and largely left
behind to be reclaimed by the
rainforest, which is no wonder why it
was never rediscovered by anyone until
the very late 20th to early 21st
centuries.
It's not very often that an entirely
brand new civilization previously
unknown to recorded history gets
discovered these days in the 21st
century, but that's exactly what the
Upano Valley site discovery was and why
it is arguably, at least in my opinion,
one of the most important archaeological
discoveries of this entire century. The
area around this part of the Amazon on
the eastern slope of the Andes Mountains
has soils that are richer than elsewhere
in the rainforest because they've been
fertilized by rich volcanic ash from
nearby volcanoes, which is also a
potential explanation for why the site
was eventually abandoned. One of the
volcanic eruptions nearby may have been
big enough to have caused an apocalypse.
But interestingly, small pockets of
fertile soils have been recently
discovered all throughout the Amazon
rainforest by archaeologists that's
called terra preta, or black soil
translated literally from Portuguese.
These pockets of terra preta are now
understood to have been man-made. It was
created by indigenous people adding a
mixture of charcoal, bones, compost, and
manure to the infamously sterile
Amazonian soil. The charcoal they added
would then remain stable within the soil
for literally thousands of years, which
binded and retained the soil's minerals
and nutrients and turned its color into
its characteristic black appearance. By
doing this, indigenous people were able
to create fertile soils out of the
Amazon themselves. And modern
archaeologists have discovered patches
of terra preta all throughout the
rainforest over the past few decades,
with the probability of this fertile
soil type appearing believed to be
particularly high along the many rivers
and streams located all throughout the
rainforest.
This all means that the long-held
notions we've maintained for centuries
about the Amazon being a sparsely
populated, nearly pristine wilderness
absent of civilizations have been dead
wrong, and we're only just starting to
understand what could all actually be
hidden out there. We now understand that
prior to the arrival of the Europeans,
the Amazon was in fact a densely
populated place that hosted complex
civilizations. And there could have been
as many as 8 million or more indigenous
people living throughout the Amazon
around the year 1500.
Also, at around the same time, it's also
now believed that as much as 1/5 of the
current Amazon rainforest was an open
savanna-type environment back then,
which enabled Amazonian civilizations an
environment to more easily thrive in. It
was only taken over by the rainforest in
the centuries after the Europeans
arrived and caused an apocalypse to take
place there. Introduced diseases brought
by the Europeans, like smallpox and
measles, coupled with their own
violence, decimated the indigenous
populations of the Americas, including
the indigenous people of the Amazon.
When Francisco de Orellana sailed down
the Amazon River in the 1540s, he
actually probably did encounter very
large Amazonian settlements and
organized armies and societies. But over
the centuries that followed from then,
disease and brutality steadily took its
toll on the rainforest's indigenous
population to the point whereby the turn
of the 20th century in 1900, their
population had probably fallen from 8
million in 1500 to fewer than 1 million.
While by the 1980s, their numbers
crashed even further to fewer than only
200,000 people remaining. Far from being
an untouched pristine wilderness, the
Amazon essentially became the world's
best-preserved post-apocalyptic
landscape instead. That was so well
hidden by the overgrowth of the
rainforest over centuries without
anybody left behind to manage it that we
didn't even realize it was a major
civilizational post-apocalyptic
landscape until, like, literally just a
couple of years ago. This all ultimately
means that additional huge
civilizational discoveries could be made
out there in the future. And the
Rostain-led team that made the massive
Upano Valley discovery in eastern
Ecuador is already preparing to survey
another 300 square kilometer site with
LiDAR that's directly adjacent to the
300 square kilometer site that they
already surveyed, which could turn up
even more history-changing discoveries
soon. And as LiDAR is used by more and
more scientists and explorers in the
21st century to steadily peel back the
foliage that has hidden the secrets of
the Amazon for centuries, we will
finally start to understand the a
map of the Amazon rainforest in the
years and decades ahead. And there's
just no telling what future great
archaeological discoveries await us
there. The rainforest still has a very
low population density today, which
means that the ruins and relics of these
previously unknown Amazonian
civilizations have been left almost
completely undisturbed for centuries or
even millennia. And as a result, the
Amazon rainforest remains today the
final vast location on the Earth's
surface where previously hidden
archaeological wonders could still lie,
just waiting to be rediscovered again
and understood by us. The Amazon will
probably be the epicenter of major
future archaeological discoveries
throughout the rest of this decade and
into the 2030s. And you should pay very
close attention to all of it because it
is all a very very exciting time.
Antarctica is easily the least
understood and the most mysterious of
all Earth's continents in the 21st
century. It's such a poorly understood
place that most people alive today still
don't even really have a solid grasp
about Antarctica's true size or shape,
something that's probably not really
helped by our perception of Antarctica
as this sprawling misshapen blob that we
always see stretching across the bottom
of our two-dimensional maps, if it's
even displayed on the map at all. In
reality, Antarctica is the world's fifth
largest continent, exceeding the sizes
of Australia and Europe and being closer
in size to South America than any other
continent. The true scale of Antarctica
can be revealed when overlaying it atop
a continent that we're more familiar
with, like North America. Antarctica is
significantly larger than the mainland
continental 48 US states. Well, the
distance from the Antarctic Peninsula to
the other side of the continent is as
far as the Canadian Arctic Islands are
to Mexico. [music] And placed over
Europe, Antarctica would stretch from
the far northern reaches of Norway and
Finland down to Iran and Iraq in the
southeast and well past Ireland into the
mid-Atlantic to the west. It's a
genuinely massive place, and it's also
almost completely empty and absent from
[music] human life.
The human population of Antarctica
ranges from as many as 4,000 people
during the warmer Antarctic summer
months to as few as only a thousand
people during the long, dark, and
savagely cold Antarctic winters. When
the darkness of night envelops the
entire continent for months straight and
the temperatures plummet to beneath
-34°C
continent-wide. But it's not just the
brutal weather of Antarctica that keeps
its population low. It's also just an
insanely remote place that's really
difficult to get yourself to. It's
located down at the bottom of the globe,
and the closest large human settlement
to the continent is Ushuaia in far
southern Argentina, which is still about
a thousand kilometers away from the tip
of the Antarctic Peninsula. Despite this
closeness, however, the distance between
Ushuaia and Antarctica separated by the
infamous Drake Passage, an expanse of
water that is perhaps the roughest and
most dangerous part of the world's
oceans. Here at the bottom of the
civilizational world between the
continents, the southern and Pacific
oceans flow unobstructed into the
Atlantic, representing the only location
in the southern hemisphere where winds
and ocean currents can each flow around
the entire world without any obstruction
from land, allowing them to violently
whip around the world continually and
keep picking up speed and strength as
they go. This, combined with the
collision of warmer water in the north
and colder water in the south, result in
powerful waves in the Drake Passage
[music] that can climb up to nearly 20 m
or 65 ft high during extreme weather
scenarios.
With the rough conditions through the
Drake Passage and the vast distances
between Antarctica and the other nearby
continents of Africa and Australia, it's
no wonder that human eyes most likely
never even saw the frozen continent at
all until the 19th century, when a
Russian ship made the first ever
recorded discovery of Antarctica in
1820. Even today, more than two
centuries later, we still understand
precious little about this isolated
continent, especially anything about
what's possibly beneath the titanic
Antarctic ice sheet. Ice covers more
than 98% of the Antarctic continent's
surface, leaving very few exposed areas
of land above the ice that we can
actually observe with our own eyes. On
average, across the entire continent,
the Antarctic ice sheet stretches more
than 2 km thick from the surface we can
observe down to the surface of the
actual continental landmass. But at its
thickest points, [music]
the ice on Antarctica can reach upwards
of nearly 5 km thick, which is nearly as
thick as six of the Burj Khalifas in
Dubai, the world's tallest building, all
stacked on top of each other. This is
why 61% of all the fresh water on the
planet is locked away in Antarctica's
ice sheet. And if the entire thing
melted away into its liquid form, it
would probably end up raising global sea
levels by around 60 m, which would be
enormously catastrophic and result in
the total obliteration of Florida and
most of the US Gulf and East Coasts.
The ice sheet of Antarctica is so thick
and impenetrable that it's widely
accepted that we know more about the
surface of faraway worlds like Mars
today than what's actually beneath the
Antarctic ice sheet on the real surface
of Antarctica. Rather than drilling
through kilometers of ice to see what's
beneath it, the primary way that we've
been able to sort of visualize what's
beneath the ice on the continent is by
flying planes over it and shooting radio
waves down into the ice below and then
analyzing how the waves echo back up to
the plane, a process that's known as
radio echo sounding. But the Antarctic
continent is, of course, a much larger
place than even Europe is. And so,
flying planes doing this technique over
the entire continent would be a brutally
painstaking, expensive, and
time-consuming process. So, as it stands
now, we only have a limited idea of
what's beneath the frozen continent
based on the few radio echo sounding
flights we've actually done across it so
far. And it's estimated that more than
90% of the continent beneath the ice
remains unmapped and unknown. But the
small amount of information we already
do know about what's beneath the world's
largest ice sheet on the world's most
mysterious continent is already
incredibly fascinating.
For starters, we already know that
Antarctica isn't really a unified
landmass beneath the ice like it appears
to us above the ice. Were all of the
continent's ice sheet to melt or be
removed, the Antarctic continent's true
shape would be revealed to us. What we
currently know as the Antarctic
Peninsula, in reality, would emerge as a
completely separate archipelago of
mountainous islands that has sometimes
been referred to as Lesser Antarctica.
While most of the rest of the continent,
known as Greater Antarctica, would
remain above the ocean surface and be
roughly the same size as Australia. Each
of these two different halves of
Antarctica, one archipelagic and one
continental, would become this way
because of their radically different
geologies and histories. The area of
Greater Antarctica, or the eastern side
of the continent, is known to consist of
more ancient igneous and metamorphic
rocks. [music]
While the more archipelagic Lesser
Antarctica is much younger and made of a
sedimentary and volcanic rocks instead.
Fascinatingly, Lesser Antarctica belongs
to the Great Pacific Ring of Fire, a
continuous belt of tectonic fault lines
and active volcanoes that spans nearly
the entire perimeter of the Pacific
Ocean and which has existed for about
the past 35 million years. As a result,
most of the archipelagos and islands
that exist in Lesser Antarctica are
volcanic [music] in nature, despite
their appearances of frozen ice and
glaciers atop of them. Mount Erebus, far
to the east in Antarctica, is the
highest active volcano on the continent
and the southernmost active volcano on
the planet, complete with a lake of
molten lava within its inner summit
crater that has been observable since
the 1970s and the last erupted only a
few years ago in 2020.
The average year-round temperature
around where Mount Erebus is located
remains around -17°C
and during the Antarctic winter months
between April and September, the
temperature will never climb above -20°C
and it'll sink to as low as -62°C
in August, cold enough to cause
frostbite to exposed skin within minutes
or to instantly freeze water. If you
were to pour out a bowl of hot water in
the air at these temperatures, it would
turn to snow before it even hit the
ground. This is an environment that is
incredibly hostile to life where you
wouldn't expect to find very much of it.
And yet, just beneath the surface of
Mount Erebus is an entire new world that
we've only just started to come to
understand. Decades and centuries worth
of hot steam produced by the Mount
Erebus volcano have carved out a network
of tunnels through the ice beneath the
mountain. Within these subvolcanic ice
caves, the temperatures are known to
reach as high as 25°C
or about 77°F,
warm enough for you or me to hang out
down there in a t-shirt and shorts and
be comfortable doing it despite being in
the middle of Antarctica. And that means
that the Antarctic subvolcanic cave
systems could be warm enough to host all
kinds of life that we may not even be
aware of yet. Back in 2017, a team led
by the Australian National University
acquired a sample of the soil within one
of these cave systems beneath Mount
Erebus. And after analyzing its
composition, they discovered that the
soil contained DNA traces of things like
algae and mosses. But most tantalizing
of all, DNA traces of small animals that
might be living down there as well in a
sub-Antarctic oasis of life. Most of
these animal-related DNA traces they
found were similar to species that we
already know of living up on the
surface.
>> [music]
>> But not all of them. Some of the traces
couldn't be linked to species we already
know about, but were most closely
related to arthropods, species like
shrimp, centipedes, or spiders. Meaning
that there could be arthropod-like
species down in these warm caves beneath
Mount Erebus that remain unknown to
mankind. And indeed, there are 15 other
active or semi-active volcanoes located
across Antarctica that could contain
similar warm steam-carved tunnels and
caves beneath them all as well. Meaning
that there could be more than a dozen of
these oasis-like ecosystems beneath the
ice of Antarctica that we presently know
virtually nothing about.
Planes flying over Antarctica with radio
echo sounding data have revealed a vast
landscape beneath the ice of rolling
valleys, riverbeds, and hills similar to
the landscape seen elsewhere on Earth,
only frozen in time and locked beneath
kilometers of ice. [music] One of the
most interesting geographic features on
the continent that was only recently
discovered in 2019, however, is what we
now know is the deepest canyon anywhere
on the Earth land surface. A canyon that
if it wasn't hidden by the ice above it,
would put the Grand Canyon in America to
shame. Within greater Antarctica,
beneath the Denman Glacier, exists the
canyon that we now understand plummets
to 3 and 1/2 km deep beneath the sea
level, which is just insanely deep. For
reference, [music] this canyon in
Antarctica sinks to a depth that is
roughly the same as the average depth of
the Atlantic Ocean, and that's roughly
half as deep as Mount Everest is tall.
The deepest point below sea level on
exposed land on the planet is the
shoreline around the Dead Sea between
Jordan, Israel, and the West Bank. And
it only sinks to as low as 413 m beneath
sea level. This canyon in Antarctica
sinks nearly eight and a half times
deeper than that. Only in the oceans do
canyons dip deeper below the surface,
[music] and we didn't even know about
this super deep canyon on Antarctica
until 2019 because it's been covered up
by kilometers worth of ice for millions
of years now. Imagine what looking at
out of this canyon would be like without
all of the ice obscuring it.
But the deepest canyon on the Earth is
far from the only interesting geographic
feature that the ice of the frozen
continent has been hiding from us. In
1958, a team of Soviet researchers in
Antarctica discovered a massive mountain
range beneath the ice sheet that nobody
knew about beforehand. It became known
as the Gamburtsev Mountain Range, named
after the Soviet geophysicist Grigory
Gamburtsev. These mountains are roughly
the same length and height as the Alps
in Southern Europe are, running for
about 1,200 km long with peaks soaring
up to as much as 2,700 m high. They're
also completely obscure from the surface
because they are buried beneath more
than 600 m of ice and snow pack, and
[music] they are still far from the only
interesting thing hidden beneath the ice
of the continent.
In the late 1950s and early '60s,
researchers began detecting a large
gravity anomaly in East Antarctica where
the gravity present was weaker than what
would be naturally expected. The anomaly
spanned across a huge area beneath the
Antarctic ice sheet that was about 243
km wide and sunk down to a depth of
about 848 m. For decades, there were
several hypotheses about what exactly
could be causing this weaker gravity in
the area of East Antarctica until
[music] in 2006, a team of researchers
from Ohio State University using data
from satellites owned by NASA and the
German Aerospace Center managed to
identify what they believed to be an
ancient 480 km wide meteorite impact
crater that was buried beneath the ice
sheet. [music]
But because of the area's extremely
remote location and distance beneath
several kilometers worth of solid ice,
there still to date have never been any
direct samples taken from the area to
actually test for this impact event
hypothesis. And so, the idea that an
asteroid could have impacted this area
and caused a massive crater in
Antarctica is still only a theory for
now, but a highly likely theory
nonetheless.
If the gravity anomaly here turns out to
indeed be a meteorite impact crater, it
would be by far the largest one ever
discovered in the world with a width
that's nearly three times as large as
the Chicxulub impact crater in the
Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico that is
believed to have been formed by a 10 km
wide asteroid that struck the area
roughly 66 million years ago and likely
contributed to the annihilation of the
dinosaurs. In order to create an impact
crater nearly three times larger than
that one in Antarctica, the asteroid
that might have hit the area would have
had to have been four to five times
larger than the dinosaur killer asteroid
was. So, roughly 40 to 50 km wide. An
asteroid that would have been big enough
to stretch from Central Park in New York
City all the way into Connecticut. Now,
because of effects like erosion, impact
craters on the Earth's surface gradually
disappear over time. Because of this
phenomenon, the Ohio State University
researchers who concluded that the
structure hidden beneath the Antarctic
ice sheet was an impact crater believe
that it happened no more than 500
million years ago and no less than 100
million years ago because the structure
seems to also have been geographically
disturbed by the rift valley in the area
that only formed around 100 million
years ago during the separation of
Antarctica and Australia from the
ancient Gondwana supercontinent.
And that timeline between 100 and 500
million years ago is extremely
interesting because it potentially lines
up more or less with the greatest mass
extinction event that ever happened in
our planet's history. The
Permian-Triassic extinction event that
took place sometime around 251.9
million years ago. An apocalyptically
traumatizing event that is also often
referred to as the Great Dying.
Something happened on our planet all
that time ago that quickly annihilated
57% of all biological families that
existed at the time, including a wipeout
of 81% of the Earth's marine species and
70% of the Earth's land-based vertebrate
species. It is by far the biggest mass
extinction event that ever took place on
the planet, [music] and we still don't
have a precise explanation of what
exactly happened that caused it. But it
could just be that the deep and
mysterious Antarctic ice sheet has been
hiding the cause of the Great Dying from
us this entire time. If indeed it turns
out that the East Antarctic gravity
anomaly is truly the biggest impact
crater that we have ever discovered. And
it's been even further hypothesized that
if it really was an impact event that
caused it, it could have been so massive
and destructive that it directly
contributed to the breakup of the
Gondwana supercontinent by severely
weakening the crust at the location of
impact, which eventually led to the
separation of that ancient continent
between Antarctica, Australia, and
India.
Also hidden beneath the surface of the
vast Antarctic ice sheet are around 675
liquid subglacial lakes that researchers
have only started discovering since the
1990s, a little more than only three
decades ago. Several of these liquid
lakes have been discovered deeper than 3
km beneath the surface of the Antarctic
ice sheet, and by far the largest of
them discovered to date is the
infamously mysterious Lake Vostok, which
was only by a team of Russian
researchers in the east of the continent
in the early 1990s. And its discovery
wasn't announced to the general public
until it was published in the scientific
journal Nature in 1996.
It turns out that Lake Vostok is a
massive body of liquid water that exists
about [music] 4 km deep beneath the
surface of the Antarctic ice sheet. And
by the volume of water contained within
the lake, Lake Vostok is surprisingly
the sixth largest known lake in the
world, containing an amount of water
within it that is even greater than that
of Lake Michigan in the United States.
And we didn't even know about it at all
until the same year that Tiger Woods
made his professional debut at the PGA
Tour.
Interestingly, the liquid water
contained within Lake Vostok is below
freezing temperature, maintaining an
average of about -3° C or about 27° F.
>> [music]
>> This is possible because it's believed
that there's a geothermal vent beneath
the lake's floor that's providing it
with some heat. While the pressure from
the 4 km of thick ice above the lake
reduces the ice's melting point and
provides the lake's water with
insulation from the abominably cold
temperatures above it. And while -3° C
temperature water is too cold for most
marine life we know of to survive, it's
still warm enough for many other species
we know of that have adapted to
extremely cold environments to thrive
in. Antarctic krill, ice fish, Antarctic
cod, and certain species of sea stars,
sea urchins, and mollusks that we
already know of are capable of surviving
in extremely cold subzero waters.
[music]
So, what mysterious life forms that
we're presently unaware of could be
existing down below in the depths of
Lake Vostok and the hundreds of other
lakes dotted across Antarctica hidden
beneath the ice sheet. Lake Vostok is a
particularly interesting case because
it's believed to have been completely
sealed off from the rest of the outside
world by the Antarctic ice sheet for at
least the past 15 million years.
>> [music]
>> Meaning that if life exists within the
lake, it has evolved in complete
separation from everywhere else in the
world for millions of years now.
In 2012, a team of Russian researchers
successfully carried out the first ever
drilling from the surface of the
Antarctic ice sheet all the way down
nearly 4 km deep to the liquid surface
of Lake Vostok, where samples of the
water were taken and carried back to the
surface. However, this initial drilling
sample taken from the lake by the
Russians has been widely criticized for
not being properly sanitized, and as a
result, the data they took is known to
be heavily contaminated. Subsequent
analysis of the lake's water sample has
revealed kerosene contamination and
outside bacteria contaminants that were
present on the drill bit before it even
reached the lake. 255
previously known contaminant species of
bacteria have been identified by
researchers in the 2012 Russian ice
sample since then, but they have also
managed to identify at least one
bacteria species from the sample that is
presently unknown and has no matches in
any international databases, which the
team hopes is evidence for at least one
unknown bacteria species that exist down
there. [music] The Russian team
apparently drilled another second
borehole down from the surface into Lake
Vostok in 2015 that they claimed was
cleaner and more properly sanitized that
resulted in another 1 L sample of Lake
Vostok's water being acquired. [music]
But the results on that water to date
have never been published or reported
on. So, it's unclear what, if anything,
they may have found in it. Most
researchers involved with Lake Vostok
expect that if life actually does exist
down there, it'll be limited to simple
life forms like bacteria, which might
not really sound all that exciting or
sexy, but it could carry [music] with it
significant implications for other
simple life forms that might be existing
elsewhere on other worlds in our own
solar system, deep in the liquid oceans
we also know exist beneath kilometers of
frozen ice on some of the moons of
Jupiter and Saturn, like Europa and
Enceladus.
But there might also just be the chance
that there actually [music] is more
complex life existing down there in Lake
Vostok than we might expect. In 2020, a
study conducted by researchers Colby
Guerra and Scott Rogers of Lake Vostok's
accretion ice, rather than the liquid
water within the lake itself, revealed
additional unknown bacteria species and,
most fascinatingly of all, an rRNA
sequence [music] that was more than 97%
similar to that of a species of rock cod
fish that is common along the Antarctic
coastline. Representing the first
scientific report of an unknown fish
species that could possibly be existing
down within Lake Vostok. It would be
incredible to one day see a sea drone
with a camera and light attached to it
get deployed down into Lake Vostok to
see more of what's actually down there
because, based on a similar event that
happened just a few years ago in 2021,
the results could indeed be wildly
unexpected. In the final days of
December in 2021, a team of scientists
from New Zealand melted a small hole
through a glacier in West Antarctica
here at the Camp By Stream. The team
knew that a large cavern of liquid water
existed about 500 m beneath the glacier
[music] surface here, carved out over
time by a small flowing river beneath
the ice. [music] But when the team
actually lowered a camera down into the
hole they carved, down into the liquid
water-filled cavern below, what they saw
shocked everybody involved. They
actually saw animals, [music]
hundreds of them swimming around in the
isolated cavern below. The team later
identified these blurry orange blotches
to be shrimp-like marine crustaceans
called amphipods. And here in this cold,
isolated cavern of water 500 m beneath
the ice and a whopping 500 km away from
the nearest sunlight, locked in complete
darkness, were hundreds of these more
complex life forms absolutely thriving.
Practically nobody expected to find that
much life down here. And so, what
implications does that 2021 discovery
have for what unknown life may be
existing within Lake Vostok? Or within
any of the hundreds of other lakes
locked beneath the Antarctic ice sheet
that we haven't ever seen? So far, the
area of the West Antarctic ice sheet
spans across a vast area that is roughly
the same size as Mexico. And yet, to
this date, humanity has only managed to
actually witness a fraction of the
unknown world that exists beneath the
ice here. A few dozen small boreholes
dotted around the region that has
exposed a disjointed area to us only
about the size of a regulation
basketball court. The world beyond that
basketball court, in an area that's the
size of Mexico, remains unobserved,
unknown, and mysterious. And I deeply
want to know more about it.
And in addition to all the unknown life
and geographic features that probably
exist beneath the Antarctic ice sheet,
there's also almost certainly a vast
amount of undiscovered and completely
untapped natural resources beneath the
ice sheet that humanity will likely
begin to deeply covet one day soon as
well. For decades it has been theorized
that Antarctica is likely home to
massive deposits of energy resources
like oil and gas and coal, owing to the
fact that for hundreds of millions of
years in the past, the continent was not
frozen and existed in a warmer part of
the world that likely contained eons
worth of animal and plant life. It was
only around 35 million years ago that
Antarctica drifted far enough south to
begin acquiring its ice sheet. And for
hundreds of millions of years before
that, it never had any, allowing plenty
of time for complex life to evolve and
die and gradually transform into
hydrocarbons like petroleum over the
eons. [music] But it wasn't until just a
few months ago, before this video was
published in May of 2024, that we had
any idea of the actual potential extent
of these Antarctic oil and gas reserves.
Early that month, evidence presented to
the UK Parliament in London revealed
that a Russian research ship operating
in the Weddell Sea region between the
Antarctic Peninsula in the west and
Greater Antarctica in the east
discovered a truly gargantuan oil field
there, estimated to contain a deposit of
approximately 511
billion barrels, which is an absolutely
absurd amount of oil.
>> [music]
>> For reference, the oil contained within
this one Antarctic superfield is roughly
double the amount of oil reserves
controlled by Saudi Arabia. Or, put
another way, the oil in this Antarctic
superfield is roughly 10 [music] times
the amount of oil that the entire North
Sea has collectively produced over the
past 50 years. British members of
Parliament cautioned in 2024 that the
Russian discovery here could become a
prelude to countries or companies
hauling in their offshore drilling
platforms to exploit the field. [music]
And, most alarmingly of all, the
discovery was made directly in the
epicenter of the most widely disputed
part of the frozen continent that is
simultaneously claimed by the United
Kingdom and Argentina and partially by
Chile as well.
But for now, straining for drilling for
oil in the Weddell Sea here is illegal
under international law because of
something known as the Antarctic Treaty,
an international treaty that has its
origins in the mid-20th century. You
see, up until the late 1950s, Antarctica
was theoretically a free-for-all land
open to exploitation, settlement, and
colonization from anyone brave enough to
try it. It was simply the continent's
extremely remote location and extremely
hostile environment that kept most
people from ever trying. But not
everyone. Seven countries officially
staked out their own territorial claims
to Antarctic territory during the early
20th century, including New Zealand,
Australia, France, and Norway, and the
sharply competing overlapping claims of
the United Kingdom, Argentina, and
Chile. All of these countries'
territorial claims in Antarctica were
based on their pre-existing legal claims
or control of territory nearby to
Antarctica, such as New Zealand's and
Australia's home territories, France's
relatively nearby Crozet and Kerguelen
Islands, and Norway's Bouvet Island.
Similarly, the UK's claimed territory in
Antarctica largely came out of an
extension of their claims to the
Falkland Islands, along with South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
nearby. While Argentina's almost
identical overlapping claim to
Antarctica was based not only on their
own territorial mainland, but also on
their identical competing claims to the
same islands claimed by Britain, the
Falklands, along with South Georgia and
the South Sandwich Islands. While
Chile's territorial claims were also
based on the proximity of their mainland
territory.
The territorial disputes on Antarctica
itself between the UK, Argentina, and
Chile and between Argentina and the UK
over all of these other islands was
heating up in the mid-20th century and
risked escalating into violence. And so,
within the context of the greater Cold
War that was going on between the United
States and the Soviet Union at the time,
a group of 12 countries got together in
1959 and signed the Antarctic Treaty,
which primarily sought to figuratively
freeze the Antarctic continent in a sort
of stasis just as it was and prevent the
use of the continent for any military
purposes while preserving it for
scientific research [music] and access.
Military operations on Antarctica were
agreed by everyone to be severely
restricted. Nuclear tests and
detonations, as well as dumping of
nuclear waste on Antarctica, were all
agreed to be banned. And a powerful
independent monitoring system was put
into place that enabled any to inspect
any other country's facilities on the
continent without warning to make sure
they were actually abiding by all of the
terms of the treaty. [music] Antarctica,
as defined by the treaty, consists of
all the land, ice, islands, and ocean
below the 60° of latitude line. The
seven countries who had already made
territorial claims to Antarctica before
the treaty was signed had their claims
frozen and they became legally
unenforceable. [music] The US and the
Soviet Union and later Russia reserved
themselves the right to stake out their
own territorial claims to Antarctica at
some undetermined point in the future.
[music]
While any country from around the world
was eligible to join the treaty and
establish research bases on the
continent wherever they deemed fit,
regardless of any other countries'
territorial claims. [music] And, perhaps
most importantly, the treaty explicitly
forbids the harvesting of any of
Antarctica's potential resources or even
prospecting for the continent's
potential resources. No mining or
drilling for resources on Antarctica
have been allowed ever since. As a
result, up to the present day in 2024,
there are dozens of active research
stations and bases dotted all across the
Antarctic continent that belong to no
less than 55 different countries from
all around the world, many of them being
within the zones of the continent's
territory that's theoretically claimed
by other countries. The United States
runs by far the biggest base on the
continent at McMurdo within the part of
the continent that's claimed by New
Zealand. During the warmer summer
months, McMurdo can host up to 1,500
residents, which is also about a third
of the entire human population that's on
Antarctica during those months. The US
also runs the Amundsen-Scott research
station at the geographical South Pole.
And while the dozens of other countries'
bases are located all across the rest of
the continent, most of them are heavily
concentrated in the relatively warmer
Antarctic Peninsula that stretches up
towards the southern tip of South
America. Argentina and Chile, however,
as the two countries that are
geographically the closest ones to
Antarctica, have put much more effort
than any of the others into actually
solidifying their territorial claims to
the continent. They are the only two
countries who have so far gone to the
lengths of actually establishing
permanent civilian settlements on the
frozen continent. The Argentinians at
Esperanza Base on the Antarctic
Peninsula and the Chileans nearby the
peninsula on King George Island with
their Villa Las Estrellas.
The populations of each of these
settlements only ranges from a few dozen
in the winters to only a little more
than a hundred in the summers, which is,
interestingly, roughly equal to the
population of the first permanent colony
that the English established in America
at Roanoke back in the 16th century. In
[music] the 1970s and '80s, the
Argentinian and Chilean governments both
began sending pregnant women to their
settlements in Antarctica so that they
would give birth to Argentinian and
Chilean citizens on Antarctic soil and
therefore strengthen their national
claims to the territories of Antarctica
that they claimed sovereignty over. This
culminated with the first human being
ever born on the Antarctic continent
with Emilio Marcos Palma on the 7th of
January 1978, [music] who's been
followed by at least 10 additional
Argentinian and Chilean children since
that. Since that time, Argentina and
Chile have even built up schools in
their permanent settlements in
Antarctica that children are currently
busy attending right now. And remember
[music] that in addition to disputing
territory in Antarctica, Argentina and
the United Kingdom also more [music]
bitterly dispute the sovereignty of the
nearby Falkland Islands along with South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
as well. This dispute has [music]
historically been far more controversial
than their disputed claims in Antarctica
because, unlike Antarctica, thousands of
people actually live here. The Falklands
are presently controlled by the UK and
have a population of about 3,600 British
citizens, which is gigantic compared to
the population of settlements in
Antarctica.
The UK has nearly continuously
administered the Falkland Islands for
nearly two centuries since the 1830s.
But for various historical and
geographic reasons, Argentina has
heavily disputed Britain's control of
them for the two centuries ever since.
[music] The dispute infamously came to a
climax in 1982 when Argentina
unexpectedly launched a full-scale
amphibious invasion of the Falklands
along with South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands, which sparked a
10-week-long war between Argentina and
the UK around the islands that killed
nearly a thousand soldiers and wounded
more than 2,000 others with major naval
losses suffered on both sides.
Argentina's invasion of the islands
ended up being decisively defeated by
the British. The islands have remained
within the UK ever since and the dispute
over the Falklands between them, while
continuing, has largely moved away into
the very far background of geopolitics
that is rarely brought up today in the
context of much larger disputes going on
in Ukraine and the Middle East. But with
that recent Russian-made discovery of
511 billion barrels of oil down there in
the middle of both of their claims in
Antarctica, the Falklands question could
be brought back to the forefront for
both London and Buenos Aires sooner
rather than later. With the current
market price for a barrel of Brent crude
oil being $86.70
when I wrote this video on the 3rd of
July, 2024, those 511 billion barrels of
oil in the Weddell Sea could,
theoretically, be worth something to the
tune of 44 trillion dollars, almost
double the entire GDP of the United
States. If a country or a corporation
could control this Antarctic oil field
and didn't give a damn about
international law and the Antarctic
Treaty System, they could literally
manage to eclipse even Saudi Arabia as
the world's mightiest oil power and
completely transform their entire
civilization in the process, which is a
whole hell of an incentive to actually
do it.
The only thing standing in the way right
now from anybody doing that on paper is
the Antarctic Treaty System that
strictly forbids anyone from harvesting
Antarctica's resources beneath the 60°
latitude line. But that treaty is
actually up for review in only 24 years
from now in 2048. And any country
involved with the treaty is legally able
to walk away from it and withdraw
whenever they want to. Right now, the
511 billion barrels of oil that the
Russians apparently discovered here are
better to think of as deposits rather
than as reserves since nobody can
legally access them. But when the
Antarctic Treaty comes up for review in
2048, Argentina, the UK, Chile, and
maybe even other outside powers will
become heavily motivated to begin
allowing drilling and mining to take
place in Antarctica if they stand to
gain trillions of dollars by doing so.
The ice cover in the Weddell Sea where
the oil field was discovered is thinning
out with climate change and is
increasingly becoming easier to access
by ship or offshore oil rig. While the
Antarctic Peninsula to the west protects
the seabed violent oceanic swell that
swirls around the continent above it.
Nonetheless, Antarctica and the Weddell
Sea is still a very difficult place to
actually work in for now. The location
is extremely remote and thousands of
kilometers away from civilizational
centers in Argentina or South Africa.
While icebergs and ice flows within the
sea can still pose a grave challenge to
the stability and safety of offshore oil
platforms. Extracting the oil deposit
here will undoubtedly be a prohibitively
expensive venture to try and undertake,
which means that for now, even if a
country like Russia didn't really care
about violating international law by
extracting the oil, they'd still have to
deal with the cold financial calculus
being against them that simply makes
extracting the oil not very economically
feasible. But again, in the
not-too-distant future as the ice cover
in the Weddell Sea thins out with
climate change and as the Antarctic
Treaty officially comes up for review in
2048, some states may be open to trying
out their shot. And if Argentina can
actually finally get its economic act
together over the next couple of
decades, they might also become
interested in challenging the United
Kingdom over the status of the Falkland
Islands again. It is the UK's control
over the Falklands along with the
uninhabited South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands that forms the legal
basis for the UK's territorial claim in
Antarctica nearby that overlaps directly
with the Argentinian's claim and with
the gigantic Russian discovered oil
field. Hypothetically, if, and it's a
huge if, Argentina were to somehow
miraculously become capable of pushing
the British out of the Falklands, then
Argentina would greatly weaken the
British claim in Antarctica that
overlaps their own and they would
greatly strengthen their own claim to
the gigantic oil field, which could
allow the country to radically transform
itself the same way that Saudi Arabia or
the United Arab Emirates did after the
Antarctic Treaty comes up for review in
2048. By allowing themselves to actually
begin extracting some to even all of
that oil. And at the same time, the UK
will be well aware of this potential
challenge in the coming decades that
Argentina [music] and potentially other
nations like Russia could mount against
them in the area. And so, they will also
be heavily incentivized to maintain
their control over the Falklands, South
Georgia, and the South Sandwich Islands
at all costs to maintain their own claim
in Antarctica and to the giant oil field
as well. For whoever maintains control
over the field after 2048 could,
potentially, become the world's next
Saudi Arabia. [music]
And for that reason, the future of the
Antarctic continent is a deeply
uncertain one.
This is Greenland, the largest, [music]
most fascinating, and most mysterious
island in the world. It is more than
three times larger than France and has
remained a part of the Kingdom of
Denmark for more than 300 years now,
which theoretically makes Denmark a
transcontinental country, the world's
12th largest country by land area, and
the largest country with a capital in
Europe other than Russia. When placed
over the European continent, Greenland's
vast size becomes significantly more
apparent, covering nearly everything
from Portugal to Poland. But despite
[music] all of this vast size, the
population on the world's largest island
is only around 56,000
people, which is even less than the
population of Andorra, a tiny microstate
wedged in between Spain and France. And
nearly one in three of those 56,000
Greenlanders all live in just a single
town right here called Nuuk, the capital
of the island. And of course, the
biggest reason why there are so few
people on this massive landmass is
because the vast majority of it is, at
least for the moment, completely
uninhabitable. 2/3 of the island
stretches high up into the north beyond
the circumference of the Arctic Circle,
a region of the planet that receives
significantly less intense solar
radiation than elsewhere because the
sun's rays have to travel a longer
distance through the atmosphere in order
to reach it, which means that solar
radiation is less concentrated and
spread out across a much larger surface
area than around a location like the
Equator where the distance that the rays
have to travel through the atmosphere is
a lot less. Basically, that all just
means that this part of the planet is a
lot colder than average. But due to the
influence of the Gulf Stream, the warm
ocean current that flows northwards from
the Gulf of Mexico and across the North
Atlantic towards Europe, a great deal of
Greenland has a lot more mild weather
than you might expect for its latitude
up here. The average winter temperature
in the capital and biggest city, Nuuk,
is still -9°C.
The town of Iqaluit in Nunavut, Canada
is at an approximately similar latitude,
but because of its distance away from
the warming effects of the Gulf Stream,
the average winter temperatures here are
more like -27°C
and it's therefore significantly colder
than Nuuk on average. However, the
biggest and most mysterious thing to
understand about the island of Greenland
is its absolutely colossal ice sheet and
the unknown wonders and discoveries that
are hiding just beneath it out of our
sight. One of the many natural wonders
of our world, this [music] ancient ice
sheet covers approximately 80% of the
surface of Greenland and is around the
same size of Alaska. This makes it the
second largest body of ice that can be
found anywhere in the world after the
ice sheet over on the opposite side of
the planet on Antarctica. On Greenland,
this huge sheet of ice is on average 1
and 1/2 km thick, while in some places,
it can reach up to 3 km thick of nothing
but solid ice built up over eons of
time. In total, there are some 2,850,000
[music] cubic kilometers worth of frozen
ice on Greenland that weighs
approximately 2.85 quadrillion metric
tons. A truly unfathomable amount of
mass for us to comprehend. [music]
The sheer weight of all that ice on the
surface is so tremendous that it has
pushed much of the underlying bedrock in
the interior of the island to be beneath
the sea level. But since many mountains
occur on the island around the
periphery, the ice sheet is largely
confined in a geographic shape that
would most resemble a gigantic bowl. The
coasts of the island are therefore
largely free of this ice sheet and its
devastatingly colder temperatures. And
that's naturally why for thousands of
years now, human activity has pretty
much been limited only to the
coastlines. Ice cores drilled out from
the sheet by scientists have revealed
that an ice sheet in some form [music]
or another has covered significant parts
of Greenland for at least the past 18
million years. While the oldest ice on
the island today is as much as 1 million
years old.
>> [music]
>> So, for pretty much the entirety of
human history, the vast majority of this
island has been sealed beneath this
impenetrable wall of ice. And the
secrets locked beneath it have only just
recently been able to be accessed. For
example, ice cores drilled out from the
sheet by scientists back in 1966
revealed the presence of sediments that
suggested Greenland was once nearly
completely ice-free and vegetated at
least once in the past million years.
Which came as a huge shock. Geologically
speaking, that's fairly recent in time
and it suggests that the island is
significantly more fragile and
vulnerable to climate change than almost
anybody initially thought. Today, only a
single small forested area on Greenland
remains in the very far south of the
island right here in the Qinghai Valley.
In this location, the summer
temperatures are just barely high enough
to sustain trees and there are big 1,500
m high mountains that surround it on
nearly all sides,
>> [music]
>> which serve to protect it from the cold
and fast winds that whip across the ice
sheet just a bit further to the north.
But other than this little 15-km long
pocket of trees and forests, the rest is
nothing but ice, rocks, shrubs, and
scattered pockets of human and animal
[music] life. In the future, however,
this tiny pocket of natural life in the
south may become the genesis point for
life spreading across the rest of the
island. Because the massive ice sheet
that covers most of it, for better and
for worse, is currently in the process
of melting. Researchers from NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory already reported a
long time ago back in 2006 that the ice
sheet and glaciers on Greenland were
melting at a rate of about 217
cubic kilometers a year, which was about
twice as fast as they were melting just
5 years before then in 2001. And as the
climate around the world continue to
grow warmer, nowhere is being more
heavily affected than the Arctic,
[music] where the temperatures are
rising at about twice the rate of the
global average. With 2/3 of the island
stretching above the Arctic Circle and
with a projected 3 to 9° C increase in
local average temperatures, the
Greenland ice sheet is significantly
more vulnerable than other locations are
to these warming effects. At the
present, it's been estimated that the
island is losing approximately 200
billion metric tons of ice per year to
the ocean and research has shown that
this could end up accelerating the
global sea levels rise by around 30 cm
by the end of this century. [music] If
this pace of melting continues steadily
or increases with current trends, the
entire 2,850,000
cubic kilometers worth of ice on the
island could all melt completely within
just a few centuries worth of time. A
blink of an eye in geological time that
usually spans millions of years. If this
ends up coming to pass, the Greenland
ice sheet will contribute a volume of
water to the world's oceans that is even
greater than the entirety of the Gulf of
Mexico, resulting in a catastrophic
[music]
global sea level rise of approximately 7
m. This would consequently flood nearly
every major coastal city that exists in
the world today and would profoundly
change the entire planet's geography.
Much of Florida and southern Louisiana
would be buried beneath the sea,
including major cities like Miami and
New Orleans. The San Francisco Bay would
expand dramatically to flood much of the
California Central Valley, including
cities like Sacramento and Stockton. A
good portion of the Bahamas would be
entirely submerged. A significant chunk
of the low-lying areas of northwestern
Europe like the Netherlands, Belgium,
[music] and northwestern Germany would
be dramatically flooded along with
significant areas of the Po Valley in
Italy, including Venice. And the
low-lying Nile Delta in Egypt, including
Egypt's second largest city, Alexandria.
A great deal of southern Iraq would be
submerged along with a majority of
Bangladesh and a good deal of West
Bengal in India. Some of the most
heavily populated places in the world. A
great deal of the lower Mekong Delta
within Vietnam, including Ho Chi Minh
City, would also be totally flooded
along with substantial low-lying areas
of eastern China, including major global
cities like Shanghai and Tianjin. In
short, were the Greenland ice sheet to
completely melt over the span of a few
centuries time, it would gradually flood
the homes of hundreds of millions of
people worldwide today and prove
absolutely catastrophic to modern human
society. And with such a massive volume
of fresh water being suddenly added to
the salty ocean around it, it could also
prove to dramatically disrupt the
circulation pattern of the Gulf Stream
that currently brings warmth over to
Europe and so, almost paradoxically,
turns Europe into a colder continent
than it is today. But at the same time,
the removal of all that ice on Greenland
would finally reveal all of the land of
one of Earth's greatest landmasses to
humans for the first time in history and
all the secrets that have been hiding
beneath it. But luckily for us, we may
not have to wait centuries to learn
about most of these secrets. And many of
them have already been discovered. In
1942, during the Second World War, an
American Lockheed P-38 Lightning had to
make an emergency landing on the island.
The crew was rescued, but the plane was
left behind where it landed and became
lost to time. Half a century later in
1992, after years of searching for it, a
team finally rediscovered the long-lost
airplane that was by then buried beneath
ft of ice from the past 50 years of
cumulative snowfall. The plane was later
restored and even returned back to
flying condition and took to the skies
once again after being buried for the
previous half a century hidden beneath
the ice of Greenland. It would
ultimately end up becoming only one of
many American artifacts lost to the ice
here for some time. In 1968, an American
bomber carrying four thermonuclear bombs
caught fire midair and crashed on
Greenland around here. An extensive
cleanup operation was subsequently
carried out by both the United States
and Denmark and nearly all of the parts
coming from the plane and the nuclear
weapons were discovered, except for one
puzzling and potentially troubling
piece. The secondary stage cylinder from
one of the nuclear bombs carrying
uranium and lithium deuteride.
Essentially, the piece that carries the
nuclear fuel for one of the bombs. A
pretty small component, no larger than a
beer keg. This component [music]
was never discovered by the cleanup
operation and likely remains buried and
hidden beneath hundreds of feet of ice
somewhere around that area to [music]
this day. And then, just a decade ago in
2013, a team of scientists made one of
the most amazing discoveries beneath the
ice of Greenland ever made so far. Using
ice-penetrating [music]
radar data collected from NASA-owned
satellites, they discovered that the
Greenland ice sheet was hiding beneath
it the longest canyon found anywhere in
the world. Now described as a mega
canyon, the so-called Greenland Grand
Canyon stretches for more than 750
km across the island, which is more than
300 km longer than even the Grand Canyon
in Arizona. It stretches [music] up to
10 km wide and carves up to 800 m deep
to just beneath sea level. And it's
believed to be a tremendously ancient
geographic feature of the island because
it was most likely carved out by a
mighty ancient river system of the very
distant past and not by any of the ice
or glaciers of the past several million
years that have kept its presence a very
well-hidden secret now for millennia.
Were the ice sheet to be removed, this
canyon could prove to be one of the
greatest and most glorious of Earth's
natural wonders to behold. But since a
great deal of it is presently beneath
sea level, it would also likely end up
being flooded with water after the ice
sheet melts. If and when the ice sheet
melts in the future, much of the
interior of Greenland that has been
pushed beneath sea level by the weight
of the ice for eons now could end up
transforming into a vast interior lake
or sea that could potentially serve to
even further accelerate [snorts]
the island's warming process. But at the
same time, with the massive weight of
the ice being removed, the island would
also steadily begin a process known as
isostatic rebound, where the land would
gradually over a span of decades and
centuries literally rebound back above
sea level in elevation, finally free of
the crushing weight that had lasted
there [music] for millions of years. And
so, in reality, Greenland's future
geography in a few hundred years from
now is basically anybody's best guess.
But without a doubt, the most important
things hiding beneath the 3 km of ice on
Greenland today are the resources and
raw materials, and specifically
hydrocarbons and rare earth elements and
minerals. The United States Geological
Survey has estimated before that they
believe there are a total of 141
billion barrels of hydrocarbons
accounting for roughly 13%
of all the planet's undiscovered [music]
oil and 30% of all of its undiscovered
natural gas sitting untapped just
beneath the surface of Greenland. If
these resource estimates are accurate
and were ever to be realized, Greenland
would suddenly end up having about as
much oil and natural gas as Iraq and
would have the fifth or sixth largest
amount of hydrocarbon reserves of any
country in the world. Since Greenland
continues to remain a territorial
possession of Denmark, a European Union
and NATO member state, these reserves
could theoretically help to dramatically
increase Europe's energy independence
from other nations like Russia or Iran.
But beyond oil and gas, the more
interesting resources hidden beneath
Greenland are likely to be rare earth
elements and minerals. These are
resources that take up this section of
the periodic table of elements that
you've probably forgotten since high
school chemistry class. But the big
thing to understand is that these
resources are vital to powering the
technologies of our modern world from
everything to smartphones, electric
cars, MRI machines, fighter jets, and
dozens upon dozens of other critically
important applications. Once upon a
time, it was the United States who was
the largest producer of these rare
earths. But that's no longer the case at
all. Today, these are resources that are
almost monopolistically dominated by
China, as they currently provide more
than 85% of the world's supply and are
home to around two-thirds of the global
supply of many rare metals and minerals
like antimony and barytes. America,
Europe, and other Western nations have
largely no other choice but to import
huge amounts of these rare earth
elements and minerals directly from
China, which is generally considered to
be the greatest geopolitical opponent of
the United States in the 21st century.
But the warming of Greenland and the
melting of the ice sheet is completely
changing this entire calculus, because
it's now generally believed that
Greenland is home to the second highest
amount of rare earths after China. Of
sudden and particular strategic
importance is the previously overlooked
and remote tiny town of Narsaq on the
south coast of the island, home to only
around 1,700 people. This is potentially
the most strategically important small
town of under a couple thousand people
found anywhere in the world today,
because the scraggly and rocky hills
that surround it are now [music]
estimated to contain roughly an entire
quarter of the Earth's supply of rare
earth minerals. A single mineral deposit
site within these hills known as
Kvanefjeld has been claimed to be the
world's second largest deposit of rare
earth oxides at around 11 million tons
and the sixth largest deposit of uranium
yet to be discovered at around 270,000
tons. If these estimates are correct, it
means that this single site within
Greenland is the largest concentration
of rare earths found anywhere outside of
China and it places the island as fourth
in the world for numbers of rare earth
reserves and roughly equivalent to
Russia. It would also mean [music] that
this site's uranium reserves alone are
roughly equivalent to the entirety of
China's [music] known reserves and ranks
Greenland as ninth in the world for
known reserves of uranium. And that's
all coming from just a single deposit.
Based on these assumptions, mining
companies, billionaires, and empires
from around the world have been
eyeballing the tiny villages of
Greenland now for years. And the subject
within Greenland itself is incredibly
divisive. On the one hand, expanding
Greenland's resource extraction industry
could provide enormous amounts of money
to the island nation and finally secure
their financial and legal independence
from Denmark after centuries of colonial
rule. While Greenland was granted home
rule from Copenhagen more than 40 years
ago back in 1979,
Denmark continues to fully administer
the island's foreign policy and provides
the Greenlandic government with an
annual subsidy of around $600 million,
which is about 60% of their entire
annual government budget. Greenland's
government is therefore still highly
dependent financially on Denmark and the
revenues gained from mining and
hydrocarbon extraction could
dramatically change this and pave the
way for full independence and
sovereignty in the future. But on the
other hand, there are many locals on the
island who are very wary of foreign
mining and energy companies coming and
setting up their operations there,
operations that could potentially lead
to things like pollution, contamination,
and changing ways of the traditional
Inuit lifestyles of the locals. And the
world's greatest powers have already
begun casting their long geopolitical
gazes to this distant island that
history always paid very little
attention to until now. Chinese [music]
state-owned companies have already been
attempting to invest in mining
operations on the island like at the
Kvanefjeld deposit, along with further
offers to invest in air and maritime
port infrastructure. What better way,
after all, to continue securing their
own global rare earth monopoly by buying
up the assets or securing the trade
relationships of what could potentially
become the second greatest source of
them in the world. And as the Arctic
continues to warm up, the sea ice across
it will melt to a point where
eventually, potentially as early as next
decade, there won't be any sea ice at
all during the summer months, which will
open up a new trade route known as the
Northern Sea Route through the northern
waters of Russia. This inevitability
will dramatically shorten the trading
distance that cargo containers will have
to travel between East Asia on the one
side and Europe and North America over
on the other. It will dramatically speed
up trading times between the economies
of Eastern Asia and the West by a
significant order of magnitude compared
with contemporary trade routes between
them through the Suez Canal or around
the southern tip of Africa and make the
Russians a lot of money in the process
as well via transiting fees. Sometime
next [music] decade, this is likely
going to become one of the biggest and
most vital trade routes in the world.
And it will also dramatically improve
the accessibility of Greenland's vast
hidden strategic resources. It is
certainly for all of these reasons and
the knowledge of how critically
important Greenland
>> [music]
>> will one day become to the global
economy why the Trump administration in
the United States floated around the
idea of purchasing the island from
Denmark back in 2019 and why Washington
has been putting continuous pressure on
Copenhagen to block the investments of
all Chinese companies there. [music]
Since they still control Greenland's
foreign policy, Denmark acquiesced to
the American demands by canceling two
Chinese construction bids for airports
at Nuuk and Ilulissat. And they declined
a Chinese offer to purchase an abandoned
naval base on the island's south coast.
However, they also firmly rejected the
American proposals to purchase the
island outright. And it's not like the
United States even has to purchase it
anyway. They already operate a major
airbase in the far north at Thule, whose
primary purpose is to serve as an early
warning system for potential ballistic
missiles being fired at the US mainland
from Russia. The greatest forces of the
21st century that are reshaping our
entire world all therefore converge at
Greenland. Rapid warming, melting, and
sea level rise caused by global climate
change, the increasing demand of
technology companies for rare earth
resources that are vital to power our
modern society, and the emerging global
geopolitical cold war between the United
States and China. There is vast wealth
that has been hiding beneath Greenland
for centuries [music] and it's only now
that we've all begun to actually
recognize it.